



























































Prepared for:


NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
6.0 ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC EFFECTS ASSESSMENT 
The description of the current environmental and socio-economic setting within the Project area 
(Section 5.0) is compared in this section against the Project description (Section 2.0) to assess potential 
environmental and socio-economic effects of the Project. The environmental and socio-economic effects 
assessment uses the information provided in the environmental and socio-economic setting and Project 
description to: 

• evaluate the environmental and socio-economic elements of importance in the Project 
area; 

• identify the potential effects of the environment on the Project;  

• develop appropriate technically and economically feasible site-specific mitigation 
measures; and 

• identify and evaluate potential Project effects associated with each environmental and 
socio-economic element of importance. 

In addition, the environmental and socio-economic effects assessment has determined the significance of 
potential residual effects resulting from construction and operation activities after taking into consideration 
proposed mitigation measures. NGTL will adopt the recommendations herein. 

6.1 Methodology 

The assessment evaluated the environmental and socio-economic effects of the construction, operations, 
decommissioning or abandonment phases of each component of the Project. The assessment method 
included the following components: 

• determination of spatial and temporal boundaries for the assessment; 

• identification of environmental and socio-economic elements; 

• identification of potential environmental and socio-economic effects; 

• development of appropriate technically and economically feasible site-specific mitigation 
measures; 

• identification of anticipated residual effects; and 

• determination of the significance of residual effects. 

This environmental and socio-economic effects assessment methodology has been developed based on 
the following: 

• the Responsible Authority's Guide to the CEA Act: Part II The Practitioner’s Guide 
(Federal Environmental Assessment Review Office [FEARO] 1994a); 

• FEARO’s A Reference Guide for the CEA Act: Addressing Cumulative Environmental 
Effects (FEARO 1994b); 

• FEARO’s A Reference Guide for the CEA Act: Determining Whether a Project is Likely to 
Cause Significant Environmental Effects (FEARO 1994c); 

• the CEA Agency Cumulative Effects Assessment Practitioners Guide 
(Hegmann et al. 1999); 

• the CEA Agency’s Incorporating Climate Change Considerations in Environmental 
Assessment (CEA Agency 2003);  

• the CEA Agency’s Assessing Cumulative Environmental Effects under the Canadian 
Environmental Assessment Act, 2012 (CEA Agency 2013b); and 

• the NEB Filing Manual (NEB 2014a). 

 
   

Page 6-1 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
The environmental and socio-economic effects assessment associated with the construction and 
operations of the Project was a collaborative effort of several qualified professionals with element-specific 
expertise.  

6.1.1 Spatial and Temporal Boundaries 

Spatial Boundaries 
The spatial boundaries used to evaluate the potential effects of the Project on the environment are 
presented in Section 1.4 and in Section 5.0 for each element. 

Individually established ecological boundaries are described in Section 6.2 for each applicable biological 
element. Spatial ecological boundaries were determined by the distribution, movement patterns and 
potential zones of interaction between an element and the Project. The ecological boundary may be limited 
to the Footprint (e.g., proposed pipeline construction right-of-way and compressor station site) or extend 
beyond the physical boundaries of the area of the Project component since the distribution or movement of 
an element can be local, regional or provincial, national or international in extent. 

Temporal Boundaries 
The time frames used in the assessment of the Project included the planning, construction, operations 
(including site-specific maintenance), and decommissioning or abandonment phases (Table 6.1). The 
construction phase includes engineering, surveying, clearing and site preparation, strippings salvage, 
grading, trenching, hydrovacing, installation, testing, and reclamation for the Project. Pending regulatory 
approval, construction activities are anticipated to begin with the compressor station in May 2015 and 
pipeline construction in September 2015. The Project is expected to be in-service by April 2016. A detailed 
schedule for the proposed pipeline and compressor station is provided in (Table 2.7). The operations phase 
was considered to commence following completion of construction in April 2016 and extend for a term 
estimated to exceed 40 years. 

6.1.2 Environmental and Socio-Economic Elements 

The potential environmental (i.e., biophysical) and socio-economic elements interacting with the Project 
were identified through the Aboriginal engagement program, the public, regulatory and government 
consultation process, experience gained during previous pipeline projects with similar conditions/potential 
issues (e.g., NGTL's Sunday Creek South Lateral Loop No. 3 Pipeline Project and NGTL’s Musreau 
Cutbank Expansion Project), as well as the professional judgement of the assessment team. 

Environmental and socio-economic elements potentially interacting with the Project include: 

• physical elements such as the physical and meteorological environment, soil and soil 
productivity, water quality and quantity, air emissions, GHG emissions and the acoustic 
environment; 

• biological elements such as fish and fish habitat, wetlands, vegetation, wildlife and wildlife 
habitat and species at risk; and, 

• socio-economic elements such as human occupancy and resource use, heritage 
resources, traditional land and resource use, social and cultural well-being, human health, 
infrastructure and services, navigation and navigation safety and employment and 
economy. 

Effects arising from potential accidents, malfunctions and changes to the Project caused by the environment 
were also considered. 

Those environmental and socio-economic elements which are not considered to interact with the Project 
components are identified and discussed in Sections 6.2 and 6.3. In accordance with Guide A.2.6 of the 
NEB Filing Manual, no further analysis is necessary for those elements where interactions between the 
Project component and an environmental or socio-economic element are not predicted. 

 
   

Page 6-2 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
6.1.3 Potential Environmental and Socio-Economic Effects 

Guide A.2.6.1 of the NEB Filing Manual assumes that identification of potential environmental and 
socio-economic effects reflects a valued component based approach where the valued components could 
be the broad elements as described in Tables A-1 Circumstances and Interactions Requiring Detailed 
Biophysical and Socio-economic Information, A-2 Filing Requirements for Biophysical Elements and A-3 
Filing Requirements for Socio-economic Elements or a representative subset of those elements. Given the 
scope of the Project, the identification of the potential environmental and socio-economic effects focuses 
on the broad environmental (i.e., biophysical) and socio-economic elements as the valued components.  

The potential environmental and socio-economic effects resulting from the Project were identified through 
consultation with Aboriginal communities, the public, government and regulatory agencies 
engagement/consultation process, experience gained during previous pipeline projects with similar 
conditions (e.g. NGTL's Sunday Creek South Lateral Loop No. 3 Pipeline Project and NGTL’s Musreau 
Cutbank Expansion Project) and potential issues, and the professional judgement of the assessment team. 
The potential environmental and socio-economic effects arising from the construction and operations of the 
Project (i.e., the proposed pipeline and compressor station) and associated facilities are identified in 
Sections 6.2 and 6.3.  

As previously noted, the Project is located entirely on Crown-owned land within the RM of Wood Buffalo 
and Lac La Biche County. With most lands in the RM of Wood Buffalo owned by the Crown, collaboration 
with the Province is an important issue when developing lands for industrial use (RM of Wood Buffalo 2011). 
Additionally, in the RM of Wood Buffalo, the LARP identifies strategic directions over a 10 year period to 
provide guidance to provincial and local decision-makers regarding land use management for the region, 
including industrial development on Crown land (Government of Alberta 2012a). The LARP identifies 
strategic direction to improve the balance of environmental, social and economic outcomes in the region. 
The Lac La Biche County MDP (Lac La Biche 2013) is intended to guide economic growth in the region by 
establishing clear goals, objectives and policies in regards to land use planning, including industrial 
development. The objectives of the LARP and the Lac La Biche MDP are included in the following 
assessment, where applicable. 

6.1.4 Mitigation Measures 

Mitigation measures, as defined under the CEA Act, 2012, are considered measures for the elimination, 
reduction or control of the adverse environmental effects of a project, and includes restitution for any 
damage to the environment caused by those effects through replacement, restoration, compensation or 
any other means. This definition also applies to reducing or managing a project's adverse socio-economic 
effects. For the purposes of this assessment, TERA defines an enhancement measure as a 
recommendation that aims to promote the likelihood of potential positive environmental or socio-economic 
residual effects. 

To ensure that the severity of potential adverse environmental and socio-economic effects are reduced 
during Project construction and operations, general and site-specific mitigation measures have been 
recommended based upon current industry-accepted standards, consultation/engagement with regulatory 
agencies, interested groups, individuals and Aboriginal communities, and the professional judgement of the 
assessment team.  

Many of the mitigation measures in this ESA have been discussed with Aboriginal communities that have 
participated in biophysical field studies. A comprehensive review of all the issues that have been raised by 
each community and the mitigation or enhancement measures proposed will be conducted. Meetings were 
arranged following the biophysical field studies to confirm the issues identified and review the proposed 
mitigation and enhancement measures (Section 3.0). The issues identified by participating Aboriginal 
communities through TLU studies and biophysical field studies for the Project are summarized in the 
TK Report (Appendix 10).  

Mitigation measures are identified in Section 6.2, as well as in the Project-specific EPP (Appendix 1). In 
addition, various requirements and guidelines of federal and provincial regulatory agencies, as well as 
industry standards and guidelines have been taken into consideration in this ESA, and the applicable 

 
   

Page 6-3 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
documents are referenced for each element. NGTL adopts all of TransCanada's plans and policies for the 
purposes of the Project. 

Accompanying this ESA are photomosaic Environmental Alignment Sheets (Appendix 2), which identify 
where some site-specific mitigation measures are to be implemented. Environmental Inspector(s) will be 
retained by NGTL to help ensure that the mitigation measures within this ESA are understood and properly 
implemented during construction. Environmental inspection is further described in Section 8.0. In addition, 
it is expected that through the ongoing consultation program (e.g., consultation guidelines and protocols for 
Aboriginal communities), additional issues related to the Project may be identified and further mitigation 
measures developed. 

6.1.5 Residual Effects 

Residual effects are the environmental and socio-economic effects remaining following the implementation 
of mitigation measures. In many situations, the recommended mitigation measures will completely mitigate 
the potential adverse effects while in other situations, the mitigation measures will lessen the effects, 
however, do not entirely eliminate the effects. Elements for which no residual effects are predicted require 
no further analysis. 

6.1.6 Significance Evaluation of Potential Residual Effects 

The determination of significance of potential residual effects generally followed the guidelines and 
principles of the NEB Filing Manual, FEARO’s The Responsible Authority's Guide to the Canadian 
Environmental Assessment Act: Part II: The Practitioner’s Guide (FEARO 1994a), FEARO’s A Reference 
Guide for the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act: Addressing Cumulative Environmental Effects 
(FEARO 1994b), FEARO’s A Reference Guide for the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act: 
Determining Whether a Project is Likely to Cause Significant Environmental Effects (FEARO 1994c), and 
CEA Agency’s Cumulative Effects Assessment Practitioners Guide (Hegmann et al. 1999). The agencies 
identify several possible methods for the determination of whether residual environmental or 
socio-economic effects are significant. These include: 

• the use of regulatory environmental standards, guidelines or objectives in relation to 
potential residual effects; 

• quantitative assessment of residual effects; and 

• qualitative assessment of the residual effects. 

The NEB Filing Manual indicates that the quantitative method should be used where possible; otherwise, 
the qualitative method can be used. Some elements can be assessed quantitatively using regulatory 
standards and guidelines. Where there are no standards, guidelines, objectives or other established and 
accepted thresholds to define quantitative rating criteria or where quantitative thresholds are not 
appropriate, the qualitative method that is based on available literature is considered to be the appropriate 
method for determining the significance of most of the potential residual effects. 

Consequently, the significance is evaluated by developing a set of qualitative criteria based on those 
identified by Hegmann et al. (1999). These criteria are identified below and their definitions are presented 
in Table 6.1. In some cases, the definitions were modified to accommodate discipline-specific parameters.  

• Spatial boundary (i.e., Footprint, LSA, RSA, Provincial, National, International). 

• Temporal context (i.e., duration and frequency of the event causing the residual effect, reversibility of 
the residual effect). 

• Magnitude (i.e., severity of the residual effect in relation to environmental, social and/or regulatory 
standards). 

• Probability or likelihood of occurrence of the residual effect. 

 
   

Page 6-4 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
• Level of confidence or uncertainty (e.g., availability of data to substantiate the assessment conclusion, 

previous success of mitigation measures). 

Ecological context (e.g., levels of existing disturbance resilience of the receiving environment) is not 
included in Table 6.1. However, the ecological context is provided in Section 6.2 for each applicable 
element. 

For environmental elements, a significant residual effect has a high probability of occurrence, is permanent 
or reversible in the long-term, is of high magnitude and cannot be technically or economically mitigated. 

For socio-economic elements, a residual effect is considered significant if the effect is predicted to be: 

• high magnitude, high probability, short to medium-term reversibility and regional, 
provincial or national in extent and cannot be technically or economically mitigated; or 

• high magnitude, high probability, long-term or permanent reversibility, within any spatial 
boundary and cannot be technically or economically mitigated. 

As previously mentioned in Section 6.1.4, mitigation is considered to be the elimination, reduction or control 
of a project’s adverse environmental effects, including restitution for any damage to the environment caused 
by such effects through replacement, restoration, compensation or any other means. 

For each environmental and socio-economic residual effect, the effect balance or direction 
(i.e., determination as to whether the effect is positive or negative) was also established. A positive effect 
balance is considered to have a net benefit to the environment or socio-economic conditions. A neutral 
balance is defined as no net benefit or loss to the environment or socio-economic conditions, while a 
negative balance is considered to be a net loss or detriment to the environment or socio-economic 
conditions. 

All significance assessment criteria (e.g., temporal context, magnitude) were considered by the assessment 
team for each residual environmental or socio-economic effect. Where appropriate, the key or most 
influential assessment criteria used to determine the significance of each residual effect is noted. Table 6.1 
presents the criteria used to evaluate the significance of residual effects identified and the definitions. 
 

TABLE 6.1 
 

CHARACTERIZATION OF RESIDUAL EFFECTS FOR EVALUATION OF SIGNIFICANCE1 

Assessment Criteria Definition 
IMPACT BALANCE – of the Residual Effect 
Positive Residual effect has a net benefit to the environment or socio-economic conditions. 
Neutral Residual effect has no net benefit or loss to the environment or socio-economic conditions. 
Negative Residual effect has a net loss or is a detriment to the environment or socio-economic conditions. 
SPATIAL BOUNDARY - Location of Residual Effect 
Footprint The land area directly disturbed by the Project construction activities, including associated physical works and activities 

(e.g., permanent right-of-way, compressor station, access road and temporary workspace).  
LSA An LSA that varies with environment and resource use related socio-economic element is being considered. For each 

element considered, the LSA is established based on the ZOI within which plants, animals and humans are most likely 
to be affected by Project construction and operations. Detailed discussions regarding the LSA and associated rationale 
are provided in Sections 6.2. For social elements (e.g., human occupancy and resource use), local potential effects are 
related to specific communities considered in the socio-economic assessment. Communities considered were based on 
whether there would be direct potential effects, such as a physical, social or economic interaction between the Project 
and community or community residents and their economic, social or cultural resources and pursuits. 
The communities considered in the socio-economic assessment include Unincorporated Community of Mariana Lake 
and the Hamlet of Conklin, Hamlet of Janvier, Hamlet of Anzac, Hamlet of Lac La Biche, Wandering River, the Village 
of Boyle, Fort McMurray, Bigstone Cree First Nation, Fort McMurray First Nations No. 468, Saddle Lake Cree Nation, 
Willow Lake Métis Local 780, Fort McMurray Métis Local 1935, Christina River Dene Nation Council, Chipewyan 
Prairie Dene First Nation, Conklin Métis No. 193, Heart Lake First Nation, Métis Nation of Alberta Zone 1, Fort 
McMurray Métis Local 1935, Fort McMurray Métis Local 2020 and Lakeland Métis Local 1909. 

RSA An RSA consists of the area extending beyond the LSA boundary and varies with the environment and resource use 
related socio-economic element being considered. For each element considered, an RSA boundary was established in 
consideration of the Project regional effects on the individual element. Further rationale for the establishment of the 
Project RSAs is provided in Sections 6.2.  

Provincial The area extending beyond regional or administrative boundaries. 

 
   

Page 6-5 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.1  Cont’d 

Assessment Criteria Definition 
National The area extending beyond Alberta but confined to Canada. 
International The area extending beyond Canada. 
TEMPORAL CONTEXT 
Duration -  
(period of the 
event causing 
the effect) 

Immediate Event is limited to less than or equal to 2 days during either the construction phase or operations phase. 
Short-term Event occurs during the construction phase or is completed within any 1 year during the operations phase. 
Long-term An ongoing event that is initiated during the construction phase and extends beyond the first year of the operations 

phase or is initiated during the operations phase and extends for the life of the Project. 
Frequency2 -  
(how often 
would the event 
that caused the 
effect occur) 

Accidental Event occurs rarely over assessment period. 
Isolated Event is confined to specified phase of the assessment period. 
Occasional Event occurs intermittently and sporadically over assessment period. 
Periodic Event occurs intermittently but repeatedly over the assessment period. 
Continuous Event occurs continually over the assessment period. 

Reversibility - 
Environmental 
(period of time 
over which the 
residual effect 
extends) 

Immediate Residual effect is alleviated in less than or equal to 2 days. 
Short-term Greater than two days and less than or equal to 1 year to reverse residual effect. 
Medium-
term 

Greater than one year and less than or equal to 10 years to reverse residual effect. 

Long-term Greater than 10 years to reverse residual effects. 
Permanent Residual effects are irreversible. 

Reversibility – 
Socio-economic 
(period of time 
over which the 
residual effect 
extends) 

Short-term Residual effect limited to the construction phase or to less than any 1 year during operations phase. 
Medium-
term 

Residual effect extends into the first 2 years of the operations phase. 

Long-term Residual effect extends beyond the first 2 years of the operations phase. 
Permanent Residual effects are irreversible. 

MAGNITUDE3 - of the Residual Environmental Effect 
Negligible Residual effects are not detectable from existing (baseline) conditions. 
Low Residual effects are detectable, however, well within environmental and/or regulatory standards. 
Medium Residual effects are detectable and may approach, however, are still within the environmental and/or regulatory 

standards. 
High Residual effects are beyond environmental and/or regulatory standards. 
MAGNITUDE3 - of the Residual Socio-economic Effect 
Negligible No detectable change from existing (baseline) conditions. 
Low Change is detectable, but has no effect on the socio-economic environment beyond that of an inconvenience or 

nuisance value.  
Medium Change is detectable and results in moderate modification in the socio-economic environment. 
High Change is detectable and is large enough to result in a severe modification in the socio-economic environment. 
PROBABILITY OF OCCURRENCE - Likelihood of Residual Effect 
High Likely 
Low Unlikely 
LEVEL OF CONFIDENCE4 - Degree of Certainty Related to Significance Evaluation 
Low Determination of significance based on incomplete understanding of cause-effect relationships and incomplete data 

pertinent to the Project area. 
Moderate Determination of significance based on good understanding of cause-effect relationships using data from outside the 

Project area or incompletely understood cause-effect relationships using data pertinent to the Project area. 
High Determination of significance based on good understanding of cause-effect relationships and data pertinent to the 

Project area. 
Notes: 1 Significant Residual Environmental Effect: A high probability of occurrence of a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude 

that cannot be technically or economically mitigated.  
  Significant Residual Socio-economic Effect: A residual socio-economic effect is considered significant if the effect is predicted to be: 
 - high magnitude, high probability, short to medium-term reversibility and regional, provincial or national in extent that cannot be technically or 

economically mitigated; or 
 - high magnitude, high probability, long-term or permanent reversibility and any spatial boundary that cannot be technically or economically 

mitigated. 
 2 The assessment period for the effects assessment includes planning, construction, operation, and decommissioning and abandonment phases 

for the Project while the assessment period for the cumulative effects assessment includes the above interval as well as the development, 
construction and operation phases of activities or projects that have previously occurred and those that are planned (publicly disclosed). 

 3 In consideration of magnitude, there is no environmental standard, threshold, guideline or objective for many of the construction/operation 
issues under evaluation. Therefore, the determination of magnitude of the adverse residual effect often entailed a historical consideration of 
the assessment of magnitude made by regulators, land authorities, lessees, other stakeholders and the assessment team to adverse effects. 
The assessment team was also aware of the increasingly stringent societal norms related to environmental effects. 

 
   

Page 6-6 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
 4 Level of confidence was affected by availability of data, precedence, and degree of scientific uncertainty or other factors beyond the control of 

the assessment team. 
 

An evaluation of combined adverse residual effects or combined positive residual effects has been 
conducted for those elements where more than one identified potential adverse effects or positive residual 
effects may occur at a particular location. The evaluation of the combined effects considers only those 
residual effects that are likely to occur (i.e., of high probability). For applicable elements, a discussion of 
the combined effects has been included in the significance evaluation to provide further understanding of 
the overall effect of the Project on the element in question. 

The extent to which professional judgement of the assessment team was used in the evaluation of 
significance of potential environmental and socio-economic residual effects is provided for each element. 
For this Project, the assessment team consisted of discipline experts, a project manager, experienced 
assessment practitioners and senior reviewers.  

A summary of the significance evaluation for residual environmental and socio-economic effects arising 
from the construction and operations of the proposed pipeline, compressor station and associated 
infrastructure and workspace is provided in Sections 6.2 and 6.3. 

6.2 Effects Assessment - Project Construction and Operations 

Using the assessment methodology described in Section 6.1, the following subsections evaluate the 
potential environmental and socio-economic effects associated with the construction and operations of the 
Project (i.e., pipeline and compressor station). An assessment of effects arising from temporary 
infrastructure and workspace construction and operations is provided in Section 6.3. 

Environmental and socio-economic elements potentially interacting with construction and operations of the 
Project are identified in Table 6.2.1. 

TABLE 6.2.1 
 

ELEMENT INTERACTION WITH PROJECT COMPONENT 

Element 
Interaction with Project Component 

Construction Operations1 
Physical and Meteorological Environment Yes Yes 
Soil and Soil Productivity Yes Yes 
Water Quality and Quantity Yes Yes 
Air Emissions Yes Yes 
GHG Emissions Yes Yes 
Acoustic Environment Yes Yes 
Fish and Fish Habitat Yes Yes 
Wetlands Yes Yes 
Vegetation Yes Yes 
Wildlife and Wildlife Habitat Yes Yes 
Species at Risk Yes Yes 
Human Occupancy and Resource Use Yes Yes 
Heritage Resources Yes No – since surface or buried heritage resources sites, if present, would have been disturbed 

as a result of construction activities, no interaction is anticipated during operations of the 
Project. 

Traditional Land and Resource Use Yes Yes 
Social and Cultural Well-Being Yes Yes 
Human Health Yes Yes 
Infrastructure and Services Yes No - since maintenance activities typically entail a comparatively small workforce using the 

services of local communities over a short period, no interaction is anticipated during 
operations of the Project. 

 

 
   

Page 6-7 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.1  Cont'd 

Element 
Interaction with Project Component 

Construction Operations1 
Navigation and Navigation Safety Yes No – since the navigability of waterways deemed navigable will generally not be affected 

during the operations phase since the pipeline will be buried under the watercourse and the 
usage of new permanent vehicle crossings is not anticipated. 

Employment and Economy Yes Yes 

Note: 1 Activities during operations include aerial patrols, vegetation management and integrity digs. 
 

The potential environmental and socio-economic effects associated with the Project, as well as the 
proposed mitigation and enhancement measures and resulting potential residual effects are presented in 
the following subsections for each environmental and socio-economic element as well as for accidents and 
malfunctions. In addition, the evaluation of significance using the criteria presented in Table 6.1 for the 
potential residual effects associated with the applicable environmental and socio-economic elements is also 
provided. 

6.2.1 Physical and Meteorological Environment 

6.2.1.1 Spatial Boundaries 

The spatial boundaries used in the effects assessment of physical and meteorological environment 
considered one or more of the following areas: 

• a Footprint Study Area (as defined in Section 1.4); and 

• a Physical Environment LSA. 

The Physical Environment and Soils LSA (Figure 5.1) is defined as the ZOI likely to be affected by terrain 
instability during construction and operations of the Project consists of a 1 km wide band centred on the 
proposed pipeline route centre line (i.e., 500 m on both sides of the centre line) and 500 m around the 
perimeter of the compressor station to incorporate effects that may extend off the Footprint (e.g., water 
erosion on slopes). This spatial extent is considered sufficient for consideration of potential effects to the 
physical and meteorological environment as a result of the construction and operations of the Project. 
Potential effects are not anticipated to extend beyond the Physical Environment LSA and, therefore, a 
Physical Environment RSA has not been established.  

The study area boundaries for the Physical Environment LSA have been used to define the spatial boundary 
for the Soils LSA based on the extent of the related effects of both of these environmental elements. Further 
details regarding the Soils LSA are provided in Section 6.2.2.1. 

6.2.1.2 Physical Environment Context 

The general topography in the area of the pipeline is characterized by undulating to rolling morainal till 
occurrences of hummocky to undulating uplands (Natural Regions Committee 2006). Approach slopes 
encountered by the pipeline route at the watercourse crosses range from low to steep (approximately 20% 
grade at the unnamed tributary to House River) (Appendix 3). Banks encountered by the pipeline route at 
watercourse crossings range from less than 1 m to approximately 5 m. The compressor station is located 
on level, stable terrain.  

As noted, the Project does not encounter any areas of permafrost (NRCan 2009a). The Project is situated 
on Cretaceous bedrock which is considered vulnerable to landslides, however, the seismic hazard is 
considered low on lands crossed by the Project (NRCan 2009c, 2010a,b).  

Reduced risks to environmental hazards such as flooding, wildfires and geotechnical hazards are key goals 
outlined in both the RM of Wood Buffalo MDP (RM of Wood Buffalo 2011) and the Lac La Biche County 
MDP (Lac La Biche County 2013). With the implementation of the recommended mitigation, the Project is 
expected to meet the RM’s and County’s plans for physical and meteorological environment. There are no 
 

   
Page 6-8 

 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
specific objectives outlined in the LARP that pertain to the physical and meteorological environment 
(Government of Alberta 2012a). 

6.2.1.3 Potential Effects, Mitigation Measures and Potential Residual Effects  

The potential effects associated with the construction and operations of the Project on the physical and 
meteorological environment were identified by the assessment team and are listed in Table 6.2.1. The 
proposed Leismer East Compressor Station is located on level, stable terrain and there are no potential 
effects on the physical and meteorological environment associated with construction or operations of the 
facility.  

A summary of mitigation measures provided in Table 6.2.2 were principally developed in accordance with 
industry and regulatory guidelines made available by the Government of Alberta (Alberta Environment 
[AENV] 1994a,b, 1988) and Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers (CAPP) (1999), as well as in 
accordance with NGTL standards. Site-specific recommendations are outlined in the EPP (Appendix 1) and 
on the Environmental Alignment Sheets (Appendix 2).  

TABLE 6.2.2 
 

POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF PROJECT 
CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS ON THE PHYSICAL AND METEOROLOGICAL ENVIRONMENT 

Potential Effect Component 
Spatial 

Boundary1 Key Recommendations/Mitigation Measures [EPP Reference]2 
Potential Residual 

Effect(s) 
1. Terrain 

instability at 
slopes 

Pipeline LSA • Implement recommendations that are a result of route-specific 
geotechnical investigation. 

• Site-specific recommendations are outlined in the EPP 
(Appendix 1). 

• Replace grade material to pre-construction contours, except if 
otherwise authorized by the Environmental Inspector(s) or 
designate. Re-establish surface drainage patterns; install 
drainage and erosion control measures, and complete the 
installation of sedimentation control measures at all watercourse 
crossings [Section 8.8].  

• Monitor areas of potential terrain instability for 2 years following 
construction. Inspect slope stability on a routine basis for the life 
of the pipeline. Conduct remedial work, where warranted, to 
protect pipeline integrity. 

• Areas of terrain 
instability may 
occur as a result 
of construction 
activities. 

2. Terrain 
instability arising 
from slumping at 
watercourse 
crossings during 
construction 

Pipeline 
construction at 
watercourses 
identified along 
the route 
(Appendix 3) 

LSA • Conduct all grading with the understanding that original contours 
and drainage patterns will be re-established during clean-up 
unless otherwise authorized by the Environmental Inspector(s) or 
designate [Section 8.3]. 

• Replace grade material to pre-construction contours, except if 
otherwise authorized by the Environmental Inspector(s) or 
designate [Section 8.8]. 

• Re-establish surface drainage patterns; install drainage and 
erosion control measures, and complete the installation of 
sedimentation control measures at all watercourse crossings 
[Section 8.8]. 

• Areas of slope 
instability may 
occur where a 
trenched crossing 
method is used at 
watercourse 
crossings. 

3. Changes to the 
Project caused 
by the 
environment 

-- -- • For a discussion of the changes to the Project caused by the 
environment, including the effects of the meteorological 
environment, refer to Section 6.5. 

• See Section 6.5 
for a discussion of 
the changes to the 
Project caused by 
the environment. 

Notes: 1 LSA = Physical and Meteorological Environment LSA. 
 2 Detailed mitigation measures are outlined in the Project-specific EPP (Appendix 1). 
 

6.2.1.4 Significance Evaluation of Potential Residual Effects 

A qualitative assessment was considered the most appropriate method to evaluate the significance of 
potential residual effects on the physical and meteorological environment, due to the lack of quantitative 

 
   

Page 6-9 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
data and accepted standards, guidelines and ecological thresholds. This qualitative assessment relied on 
available research literature and the professional judgement of the assessment team.  

Table 6.2.3 provides a summary of the significance evaluation of potential residual environmental effects 
of the construction and operations of the pipeline on the physical and meteorological environment. The 
rationale used to evaluate the significance of each of the residual environmental effects is provided below. 
Effects of the environment on the Project (i.e., wildfire, floods and changes in weather trends) are discussed 
in Section 6.5. 

TABLE 6.2.3 
 

CHARACTERIZATION OF POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS FOR EVALUATION 
OF SIGNIFICANCE – PHYSICAL AND METEOROLOGICAL ENVIRONMENT 

Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
a. Areas of terrain instability 

as a result of 
construction activities 

Impact balance: Negative Terrain instability could affect the integrity of the pipe. 
Spatial boundary: Physical 
Environment LSA 

Terrain instability as a result of construction activities may extend beyond the 
construction workspace. 

Duration: Short-Term The event causing terrain instability is construction of the pipeline (e.g., grading, and 
rough clean-up). 

Frequency: Isolated The event causing terrain instability (i.e., construction of the pipeline) is confined to a 
specific period. 

Reversibility: Short-Term Effects causing terrain instability could take up to a year to remediate. 
Magnitude: Low The implementation of the proposed mitigation measures is expected to effectively 

reduce the potential effects on terrain instability. 
Probability: Low Terrain instability will likely be avoided by using proven mitigation procedures. 
Confidence: High Based on data pertinent to the Project area and experience of the assessment team. 
Significance: Not Significant The residual effect of terrain instability occurring as a result of planned construction 

activities is reversible in the short-term and of low magnitude and is therefore considered 
not significant. 

b. Areas of slope instability 
may occur where a 
trenched crossing 
method is used at 
watercourse crossings 

Impact balance: Negative Slope instability could affect the integrity of the pipe.  
Spatial boundary: Physical 
Environment LSA 

Slope instability as a result of construction activities may extend beyond the construction 
workspace 

Duration: Short-Term The event causing slope instability is construction of the pipeline (e.g., grading, and 
rough clean-up). 

Frequency: Isolated The event causing slope instability (i.e., construction of the pipeline) is confined to a 
specific period. 

Reversibility: Short to 
Medium-Term 

Effects causing areas of slope instability at watercourse crossings could be greater than 
one year however, is likely to take less than or equal to 10 years to reverse residual 
effect. 

Magnitude: Low The implementation of the proposed mitigation measures is expected to effectively 
reduce the potential effects on slope instability. 

Probability: Low Slope instability will likely be avoided by using proven mitigation procedures. 
Confidence: High Based on data pertinent to the Project area and experience of the assessment team. 
Significance: Not Significant The residual effect of slope instability at trenched watercourse crossings is considered to 

be of low probability given proper trenched crossing procedures and reversible in the 
short to medium-term and is, therefore, not significant. 

Note:  Significant Residual Environmental Effect: A high probability of occurrence of a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot 
be technically or economically mitigated. 

 

Terrain Instability 
Minor areas of terrain instability may occur along segments of the pipeline route as a result of the 
construction activities (e.g., trenching, grading). The impact balance of this residual effect is considered 
negative since terrain instability could affect the integrity of the pipe. The construction of the pipeline will 
comply with provincial and federal regulatory guidelines and industry-accepted practices and measures 
outlined in the EPP. Areas of potential terrain instability will be specifically monitored for two years after 
construction with subsequent routine monitoring during aerial patrols over the life of the pipeline and 
promptly remediated, where warranted, to protect pipeline integrity and maintain stable landscape contours. 
The residual effect of terrain instability occurring as a result of planned construction activities is reversible 

 
   

Page 6-10 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
in the short-term and of low magnitude since any unstable terrain identified is expected to be fully 
restabilized in less than 1 year following remediation activities (Table 6.2.3, point [a]).  

Slope Instability Arising from Slumping at Watercourse Crossings 
Areas of slope instability may occur where a trenched crossing method is used at watercourse crossings. 
The impact balance of this residual effect is considered negative since slope instability could affect the 
integrity of the pipe and water quality of the watercourses (see Section 6.2.3). Trenched crossings 
(i.e., isolated or open cut) are planned for all watercourse crossings along the pipeline route, with the 
exception of the House River (WC8P) (i.e., primary trenchless option) (Appendix 3). Mitigation measures 
to prevent and control slope instability during construction will be implemented. The residual effect of slope 
instability at trenched watercourse crossings is of low probability given proper isolated trenched crossing 
procedures and the mitigation measures outlined in Table 6.2.2. This potential effect is reversible in the 
short to medium-term depending on the length of time required to re-stabilize the affected area (Table 6.2.3, 
point [b]).  

6.2.1.5 Summary 

As identified in Table 6.2.3, there are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of a 
permanent or long-term residual environmental effect on the physical and meteorological environment of 
high magnitude that cannot be technically or economically mitigated. Consequently, it is concluded that the 
residual environmental effects of the Project construction and operations (i.e., pipeline) on the physical and 
meteorological environment will be not significant. 

6.2.2 Soil and Soil Productivity 

6.2.2.1 Spatial Boundaries 

The spatial boundaries used in the effects assessment of soils and soil productivity considered one or more 
of the following areas: 

• a Footprint Study Area (as defined in Section 1.4); and 

• a Soils LSA. 

The spatial boundaries of the Soil LSA (Figure 5.1) are defined as a 1 km wide band centred on the 
construction right-of-way (e.g., 500 m on both sides of the centre line of the construction right-of-way). This 
spatial extent is considered sufficient for consideration of potential effects on soil and soil productivity as a 
result of the construction and operations of the Project. 

Based on a close correlation and relationship between the effects of the Project to both the physical 
environment and soils (i.e., construction activities), the spatial boundary of the Physical and Meteorological 
Environment LSA was used to define the spatial boundary of the Soils LSA which is defined as a 1 km wide 
band centred on the pipeline route centre line (i.e., 500 m on both sides of the centre line) and 500 m 
around the perimeter of the compressor station to incorporate effects that may extend off the Footprint 
(e.g., bedrock or large rocks within trench depth). This spatial extent is deemed sufficient for consideration 
of potential effects to soils and soil productivity as a result of the construction and operations of the Project. 
Potential effects are not anticipated to extend beyond the Soils LSA and, therefore, a Soils RSA has not 
been established. The Soils LSA is shown on Figure 5.1. 

6.2.2.2 Soil Context 

From KP 0 to KP 20.9, the pipeline route encounters soil units of the Grey Wooded soil group with alluvial 
parent material and from KP 21 to KP 36.3 the pipeline route encounters glacial parent material 
(Table 5.2.1). The compressor station site encounters: the Falher soil group, consisting of dark grey solod, 
clay loam and clay; the Prestville soil group, consisting of peaty meadow, silty clay loam and clay; and the 
Judah soil group, consisting of dark grey wooded, silty clay loam and silty clay (Wynnyk et al. 1963, Lindsay 
et al. 1957, Odynsky et al. 1961).  

 
   

Page 6-11 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
The Soils LSA does not encounter any federally-listed contaminated sites (Treasury Board of Canada 
Secretariat 2014). The pipeline route will parallel existing disturbance for approximately 77% of its length 
and the potential for encountering contaminated soils is anticipated to be higher on or adjacent to previously 
disturbed lands (e.g., pipeline rights-of-way, access roads, well sites). This assumption is based on there 
being a higher probability of past spills associated with operations of the existing pipelines and traffic on 
the access roads. 

6.2.2.3 Potential Effects, Mitigation Measures and Potential Residual Effects 

The potential effects associated with the construction and operations of the Project on soil and soil 
productivity were identified by the assessment team and are listed in Table 6.2.4. 

Mitigation measures were developed in accordance with industry and provincial regulatory guidelines 
including Alberta Environmental Protection (1994, 1998), AENV (1988, 1994, 1995), Alberta Pipeline 
Environmental Steering Committee (1996), CAPP (1996, 1999), and Government of Alberta (2013a), as 
well as in accordance with NGTL standards.  

TABLE 6.2.4 
 

POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF  
PROJECT CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS ON SOIL AND SOIL PRODUCTIVITY 

Potential Effect Component 
Spatial 

Boundary1 
Key Recommendations/Mitigation Measures 

[EPP Reference]2 
Potential Residual 

Effect(s) 
1. Lowering of soil 

productivity 
through mixing of 
strippings with 
subsoil or burial 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

Footprint Strippings Salvage  
• Before the start of construction, the Environmental Inspector(s) will 

review the Contractor’s preliminary grade plan to ensure environmental 
resources are not compromised as a result of grading [Section 6.0].  

• Do not conduct strippings salvage, except where grading is required 
[Section 8.3]. 

• Salvage strippings (surface organics) where grading is required using 
appropriate typical drawings as a guide (Dwg. STDS-03-ML-05-444 a 
and b, Dwg. 1) [Appendix 1D]. The area stripped is to correspond to the 
area to be graded [Section 8.3]. 

• At locations where the organic layer has been stripped, place spoil in a 
manner that allows spoil to be replaced separately from organic 
material [Section 8.5]. 

• Grub tree roots, where required with a hoe and thumb or alternate 
equipment to preserve surface organic material [Section 8.2]. 

• Do not mix snow with spoil material during backfilling [Section 8.6]. 
• Complete machine clean-up immediately following construction and 

prior to spring break-up [Section 8.8]. 
Strippings Replacement 
• Replace strippings evenly over all portions of the right-of-way that have 

stripped or portions of the facility site that will not be graveled over 
[Section 8.8]. 

• Postpone replacement of strippings during wet conditions to prevent 
erosion and/or damage soil structure [Section 8.8]. 

Stripping Storage 
• Ensure strippings storage areas are in approved right-of-way, facility 

site and temporary workspace [Section 8.3]. 
• If wet/thawed soil conditions occur, implement the Wet Soils 

Contingency Plan [Section 8.3]. 

• Mixing of strippings 
and subsoil due to 
strippings salvage 
activities or burial 
during trenching 
where strippings 
salvage did not 
occur may degrade 
soil quality.  

 

2. Degradation of soil 
structure and 
lowering of soil 
capability through 
compaction and 
rutting 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

Footprint • In the event of adverse weather that could result in rutting and/or 
compaction, the Environmental Inspector(s), in consultation with the 
Construction Manager, may implement contingency measures as 
outlined in the Adverse Weather Contingency Plan [Appendix 1E]. 
Regulatory personnel may be consulted if warranted [Section 8.3].  

• No residual effect 
identified. 

 

 
   

Page 6-12 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.4  Cont'd 

Potential Effect Component 
Spatial 

Boundary1 
Key Recommendations/Mitigation Measures 

[EPP Reference]2 
Potential Residual 

Effect(s) 
2. Degradation of soil 

structure and 
lowering of soil 
capability through 
compaction and 
rutting (cont’d) 

See above See above • Following an adverse weather event, the Contractor is responsible for 
confirming the efficacy of sediment and erosion control measures, and 
whether corrective action is required. The Environmental Inspector(s), 
in consultation with the Construction Manager, will implement 
contingency measures as outlined in the Adverse Weather Contingency 
Plan [Appendix 1E] [Section 8.3]. 

• See above. 

3.  Loss of strippings 
or upper soil 
material through 
wind or water 
erosion 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

Footprint 
 

• Implement the Soil Erosion Contingency Plan, where warranted 
[Appendix 1E]. 

• Install cross ditches and berms on moderate to steep slopes in order to 
prevent runoff along right-of-way and subsequent erosion. Install berms 
immediately downslope of all trench breakers [Section 8.8]. 

• Re-establish surface drainage patterns; install drainage and erosion 
control measures, and complete the installation of sedimentation control 
measures at all watercourse crossings [Section 8.8]. 

• Leave openings in the trench crown and all windrows at appropriate 
locations to allow for temporary as well as permanent cross right-of-way 
drainage [Section 8.6]. 

• Seed riparian and erosion prone areas with a native cover crop and 
seed mix approved by the applicable regulatory agency. Seeding will 
follow as close as possible to rough clean-up and surface material 
replacement pending seasonal or weather conditions [Section 8.8]. 

• Rollback, coarse, woody debris and small diameter, non-merchantable 
timber on erosion prone slopes, when deemed necessary by the 
Environmental Inspector. Walk down erosion control rollback with a 
dozer (refer to Appendix 1D, Dwg. STDS-03-ML-05-312) [Section 8.8].  

• Areas of potential terrain instability will be monitored for two years 
following construction. Slope stability will be inspected on a routine 
basis for the life of the pipeline. Remedial work will be conducted where 
warranted to protect pipeline integrity [Section 9.0]. 

• Surface erosion 
may occur until a 
vegetative cover 
has been 
established. 

4.  Excessive trench 
subsidence or 
remnant crown 
over the trench 

Pipeline 
Construction 

Footprint • Do not mix snow with spoil material [Section 8.5]. 
• To reduce the potential for ditch line subsidence, roach all available 

spoil over the ditch line to allow for settlement. If necessary, rework 
spoil material to breakup frozen clumps prior to ditch backfill 
[Section 8.6]. 

• Leave openings in the trench crown and all windrows at appropriate 
locations to allow for temporary and permanent cross right-of-way 
drainage [Section 8.6]. 

• Excessive trench 
subsidence or 
remnant crown 
may occur over the 
trench. 

5.  Disturbance of 
previously 
contaminated soils 
during construction 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

Footprint • In the event that contaminated soils are encountered during Project 
construction, implement the TransCanada Waste and Hazardous 
Materials Management Manual. 

• Follow remediation procedures outlined in the NEB Remediation 
Process Guide (NEB 2011) in the event that contaminated sites are 
encountered during Project construction activities. 

• No residual effect 
identified. 

6.  Soil contamination 
due to spot spills 
during construction 
and operations 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

Footprint • The Contractor will ensure equipment is well-maintained and free of 
fluid leaks [Section 8.1]. 

• In the event contaminated soils are encountered during construction, 
implement TransCanada Waste and Hazard Materials Management 
Manual [Section 8.1]. 

• No residual effect 
identified. 

7.  Soil disturbance 
(e.g., maintenance 
dig activities) 
during operations 

Pipeline Footprint • Implement the recommended soil handling procedures outlined above 
in this table to reduce the potential for a reduction in soil productivity 
when construction activities involving soil disturbance are required 
during operations of the pipeline. 

• Areas that are susceptible to erosion or difficult to revegetate (e.g., due 
to high salinity) will be identified, and records of remedial measures 
implemented as well as the success of these measures will be 
maintained. This information will be made available to construction 
Contractors and supervisors prior to as well as during operations and 
maintenance activities to allow implementation of adaptive mitigation 
strategies to reduce impacts on soil and soil productivity. 

• Strippings and 
subsoil mixing and 
erosion during 
operations and 
maintenance. 

 
   

Page 6-13 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.4  Cont'd 

Potential Effect Component 
Spatial 

Boundary1 
Key Recommendations/Mitigation Measures 

[EPP Reference]2 
Potential Residual 

Effect(s) 
7.  Soil disturbance 

(e.g., maintenance 
dig activities) 
during operation 
(cont’d) 

See above See above • Monitor areas of potential terrain instability for 2 years following 
construction. Inspect slope stability on a routine basis for the life of the 
pipeline. Conduct remedial work, where warranted, to protect pipeline 
integrity [Section 9.0]. 

• See above. 

Notes: 1 LSA = Soils LSA. 
 2 Detailed mitigation measures are outlined in the Project-specific EPP (Appendix 1). 
 

6.2.2.4 Significance Evaluation of Potential Residual Effects 

A qualitative assessment was considered the most appropriate method to evaluate the significance of 
potential residual effects on soil and soil productivity, due to the lack of quantitative data and accepted 
standards, guidelines and ecological thresholds. This qualitative assessment relied on available research 
literature and the professional judgement of the assessment team.  

Table 6.2.5 provides a summary of the significance evaluation of potential residual environmental effects 
of the construction and operations of the Project on soil and soil productivity. The rationale used to evaluate 
the significance of each of the above residual environmental effects is provided below. An evaluation of 
significance is not required for those potential effects where no residual effect is identified (i.e., degradation 
of soil structure and lowering of soil capability through compaction and rutting, disturbance of previously 
contaminated soils during construction, and soil contamination due to spot spills during construction and 
operations). 

TABLE 6.2.5 
 

CHARACTERIZATION OF POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS FOR 
EVALUATION OF SIGNIFICANCE – SOIL AND SOIL PRODUCTIVITY 

Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
a. Mixing of strippings and 

subsoil due to strippings 
salvage activities or burial 
during trenching where 
strippings salvage did not 
occur 

Impact balance: Negative Some soil productivity could be lost.  
Spatial boundary: Footprint Admixing is confined to the area of disturbance along the pipeline construction 

right-of-way and compressor station Footprint. 
Duration: Short-Term The event causing admixing is construction of the Project. 
Frequency: Isolated The event causing admixing is confined to a specific period. 
Reversibility: Medium to 
Long-Term  

Some strippings may be lost, however, it is expected that soil and non-gravelled areas 
will support vegetation within several years. Gravelled areas of the compressor station 
and permanent access will involve strippings be salvaged, stored and then replaced in 
the long-term. 

Magnitude: Low Since the area of strippings buried is limited to the trench line and in consideration that 
the minimal disturbance approach proposed by NGTL is acceptable to AESRD, it is 
considered to be within environmental standards and consequently, of low magnitude.  

Probability: High  Admixing is a common residual effect of pipeline construction.  
Confidence: High There is a good understanding by the assessment team of cause-effect relationships 

between pipeline construction and soil productivity. 
Significance: Not Significant  The effect is of low magnitude and reversible in the medium-term and, therefore, not 

significant. 
b. Surface erosion may 

occur until a vegetative 
cover has been 
established 

Impact balance: Negative Erosion could decrease soil productivity. 
Spatial boundary: Footprint Erosion is confined to the area of disturbance along the pipeline construction right-of-

way and the compressor station site. 
Duration: Short-Term The event causing erosion is construction of the Project. 
Frequency: Isolated The event causing erosion (i.e., construction of the Project) is confined to a specific 

period. 
Reversibility: Short to 
Medium-Term 

It is expected to take less than a year to establish a stable vegetative cover for most of 
the right-of-way and strippings storage piles, however, may be longer localized areas.  

 
   

Page 6-14 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.5  Cont’d 

Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
b. Surface erosion may 

occur until a vegetative 
cover has been 
established (cont’d) 

Magnitude: Low NGTL’s minimal disturbance approach is intended to reduce the areal extent of soil 
disturbance. The implementation of the proposed mitigation measures is expected to 
effectively reduce the effects of erosion. 

Probability: High Minor erosion is likely to occur as a result of the Project. 
 

Confidence: High There is a good understanding by the assessment team of cause-effect relationships 
between pipeline construction and soil productivity. 

Significance: Not Significant Surface erosion is considered to be of low magnitude and reversible in the short to 
medium-term and is therefore not significant. 

c. Excessive trench 
subsidence or a remnant 
crown may occur over the 
trench 

Impact balance: Negative Trench subsidence or a remnant crown may reduce soil productivity and can affect local 
drainage patterns. 

Spatial boundary: Footprint Trench subsidence or a remnant crown is confined to the area of disturbance along the 
pipeline construction right-of-way. 

Duration: Short-Term The event causing trench subsidence or a remnant crown is construction of the pipeline. 
Frequency: Isolated The event causing trench subsidence or a remnant crown is confined to a specific period. 
Reversibility: Short to 
Medium-Term 

Remedial work associated with remnant crowns and trench subsidence typically is 
conducted within a year of construction, however, localized trench subsidence may also 
arise 2 or 3 years after construction and would be addressed during the PCM Program. 

Magnitude: Low The implementation of the proposed mitigation measures is expected to effectively 
reduce the effects of a remnant crown and trench subsidence on soil productivity. 

Probability: High  Trench subsidence and/or remnant crown are likely to occur as a result of pipeline 
construction.  

Confidence: High  There is a good understanding by the assessment team of cause-effect relationships 
between pipeline construction and soil productivity. 

Significance: Not Significant  The residual effect is considered to be of low magnitude and reversible in the short to 
medium-term and, therefore, considered not significant. 

d. Strippings and subsoil 
mixing and erosion 
during operations and 
maintenance 

Impact balance: Negative Some soil productivity could be lost.  
Spatial boundary: Footprint A reduction in soil productivity is confined to the area of disturbance along the 

construction right-of-way. 
Duration: Short-Term The event causing a reduction in soil productivity is maintenance activities (such as 

integrity digs), which will be completed within one year at any given time during the 
operations phase. 

Frequency: Periodic The event causing a reduction in soil productivity (i.e., maintenance activities such as 
integrity digs) occurs intermittently, however, repeatedly, over the assessment period. 

Reversibility: Medium-Term Some strippings may be lost, however, it is expected that soil will support vegetation 
within several years. 

Magnitude: Low Given the limited area affected during maintenance activities. 
Probability: High A reduction in soil productivity due to soil disturbance during maintenance activities is a 

common residual effect. 
Confidence: High There is a good understanding by the assessment team of cause-effect relationships 

between pipeline construction and soil productivity. 
Significance: Not Significant  The residual effect is considered to be of low magnitude and reversible in the medium-

term and therefore not significant. 
e. Combined effects on soil 

and soil productivity 
Impact balance: Negative Some soil productivity could be lost. 
Spatial boundary: Footprint The combined effects on soil and soil productivity is confined to the area of disturbance 

along the construction right-of-way. 
Duration: Short-Term The event causing the combined effects on soil and soil productivity is construction of the 

Project or maintenance activities. 
Frequency: Isolated The event causing combined effects on soil productivity (i.e., construction of the pipeline 

and compressor station or maintenance activities) is confined to a specific period. 
Reversibility: Medium-Term It is expected that soil will support a vegetated cover over time.  
Magnitude: Low The implementation of the proposed mitigation measures outlined in Table 6.2.4 is 

expected to effectively reduce the combined effects on soil productivity. 
Probability: High Strippings/subsoil mixing, surface erosion and excessive trench subsidence have a high 

probability of occurring and are likely to occur in combination at a particular location. 
Confidence: High There is a good understanding by the assessment team of cause-effect relationships 

between pipeline and facility construction and soil productivity. 
Significance: Not Significant The combined effects on soil and soil productivity are considered to be of low magnitude 

and reversible in the medium-term and therefore not significant. 

 
   

Page 6-15 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Note:  Significant Residual Environmental Effect: A high probability of occurrence of a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot 

be technically or economically mitigated. 
 

Strippings and Subsoil Mixing or Burial 
During construction of the Project, it is likely that some strippings/subsoil mixing or burial will occur. The 
report Soil Series Information for Reclamation Planning in Alberta Vol. 1 (Alberta Conservation and 
Reclamation Council 1993) states that there may be a benefit in mixing the upper layer with the subsoil 
layer (i.e., overstripping) to create the best seedbed quality. However, some soil productivity may be lost 
when strippings/subsoil mixing results in loss of seedbed (on upland soils), change in water holding capacity 
or impacts drainage (on peatland soils), which is considered, on balance, a negative impact.  

NGTL has adopted a minimal surface disturbance technique. Consequently, salvage of strippings will only 
be conducted where grading is required. NGTL considers strippings the surface organic material (i.e., duff 
or leaf litter). In segments of the pipeline route where strippings salvage is not conducted (i.e., flat and level 
terrain within upland forest, mineral wetlands and peatlands) disturbance will be limited to the trench line, 
with the intent to leave the vegetated root mat and seedbed intact on the remainder of the right-of-way. The 
surface organic material at the compressor station site will be stripped prior to construction. Gravelled areas 
of the compressor station and permanent access will involve strippings be salvaged, stored and then 
replaced in the long-term. On soils associated with peatlands, little to no strippings salvage is planned, 
since these locations are typically flat/level terrain, where no grading is typically required.  

Trench material is excavated with the surface organic layer and mineral soil excavated and stored together. 
Admixing during ditch trenching occurs. However, prior to trenching, snow piled over the trench area is 
removed and stored on the edge on the spoil side of the pipeline right-of-way. During this snow removal, 
some underlying organic material is inevitably taken up and mixed with the snow. Surface organics removed 
during snow removal prior to trenching is spread over the right-of-way following backfill activities. These 
surface organics together with the organics in the trench backfill provides a base for regeneration of natural 
vegetation. 

Past project experience has shown that soil productivity (i.e., ability to support vegetation species) would 
return on non-gravelled areas as a result of natural processes (e.g., leaf litter, organic debris, native plant 
encroachment, etc.) over several years (i.e., reversed in the medium-term) depending on the amount of 
organic material, growing conditions and development of the leaf litter. Since the area of admixing is limited 
to the trench line and the minimal disturbance approach proposed by NGTL is acceptable to AESRD, it is 
considered to be within environmental standards and consequently, of low magnitude 
(Table 6.2.5, point [a]).  

Surface Erosion 
Construction activities that disturb soil (i.e., pipeline, temporary workspace and compressor station 
construction) will likely result in some minor surface erosion of strippings until a stable vegetative cover can 
be established, particularly on slopes that are more susceptible to water erosion. Vegetation at the 
proposed Leismer East Compressor Station will not re-establish as disturbed areas will be fenced and 
gravelled following construction activities.  The impact balance of this residual effect is considered negative 
since erosion could decrease soil productivity. NGTL’s minimal disturbance is intended to reduce the aerial 
extent of soil disturbance. The recommended erosion control measures to address this issue are the 
industry accepted standards and, consequently, are expected to reduce loss of surface soils resulting from 
erosion to minor levels. This residual effect is reversible in the short to medium-term, since stable vegetation 
cover on the right-of-way or in the case of compressor station construction, on the strippings storage piles, 
will likely establish within one year, however, may take longer in localized areas with steep slopes. This 
residual effect is of low magnitude since it is considered to be well within environmental tolerances 
(Table 6.2.5, point [b]).  

Excessive Trench Subsidence or Remnant Crown 
Construction activities may result in localized areas of excessive trench subsidence and/or a remnant crown 
over the trench along the pipeline route. The impact balance of this residual effect is considered negative 
since excessive trench subsidence or remnant crowns may reduce soil productivity and affect local surface 
 

   
Page 6-16 

 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
drainage. Proposed industry-accepted standard mitigation includes ensuring crowning over the trench line 
to ensure pipeline cover and reduce trench settlement. Reversibility is short to medium-term since remedial 
work associated with trench subsidence typically occurs within a year of construction; however, localized 
trench subsidence may arise up to three years following construction and the remnant crown is 
discontinuous to allow for normal surface drainage. It is anticipated that excessive trench subsidence would 
be identified during the PCM Program and appropriate mitigation measures taken. The magnitude is 
considered low since the residual effect is considered to be well within environmental tolerances 
(Table 6.2.5, point [c]). 

Strippings and Subsoil Mixing and Erosion During Operations and Maintenance  
A reduction in soil productivity may result when maintenance activities involving soil disturbance are 
required during operation of the pipeline. With the implementation of mitigation measures outlined in 
Table 6.2.4, this residual effect is reversible in the medium-term and of low magnitude (Table 6.2.5, 
point [d]).  

Combined Effects on Soils and Soil Productivity  
The combined effects for soils are those that may occur in combination during construction (items [a] 
through [c]). The combined effects on soil productivity of these potential residual effects occurring at one 
location would be not significant due to the overall low magnitude if all the effects were to occur at a 
particular location based in part on the limited areal extent where the effects would occur (i.e., Footprint). 
However, reversibility is considered to be medium-term since any combined effects on soil productivity are 
anticipated to take between 1 and 10 years to reverse (Table 6.2.5, point [e]). 

6.2.2.5 Summary 

Based on Table 6.2.5, there are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of a permanent 
or long-term residual environmental effect on soil and soil productivity of high magnitude that cannot be 
technically or economically mitigated. Consequently, the residual environmental effects of Project 
construction and operations (i.e., pipeline, compressor station and access road) on soil and soil productivity 
will be not significant. 

6.2.3 Water Quality and Quantity 

6.2.3.1 Spatial Boundaries 

The spatial boundaries used in the effects assessment of water quality and quantity considered one or 
more of the following areas: 

• a Footprint Study Area (as defined in Section 1.4);  

• a Water Quality and Quantity LSA; and 

• an Aquatics RSA. 

The Water Quality and Quantity LSA (Figure 5.2) is defined as a 1 km band centred on the proposed centre 
line (i.e., 500 m on both sides of the centre line) to incorporate effects that may extend beyond the Footprint 
(e.g., erosion from surface runoff). At watercourses the LSA matches the instream component of the Fish 
and Fish Habitat LSA. The ZOI is typically the reach of a waterbody where 90% of the sediment load caused 
by construction activities is expected to fall out of suspension (AENV 2000a,b). The ZOI at each 
watercourse was determined during desktop studies based on the professional experience and judgment 
of the QAES by comparing waterbodies crossed by the pipeline to the previously studied waterbodies of a 
similar size and class. The direct disturbance ZOI is defined as the area extending 100 m upstream of the 
centre of the pipeline route to a minimum of 300 m downstream of the centre of the pipeline route. There 
are no watercourses location within 30 m of the proposed compressor station location.  

The Aquatics RSA (Figure 5.2) is defined as a 30 km wide band centred on the pipeline route centre line 
(i.e., 15 km on both sides of the centre line). The RSA also includes a 15 km long downstream extension 
along the Athabasca River and a 2 km upstream extension along the House River, from the 
 

   
Page 6-17 

 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Athabasca/House River confluence, with a 500 m buffer on both sides. The Aquatics RSA is the area where 
the direct and indirect influence of other activities could interact with the Project and may cause cumulative 
effects.  

6.2.3.2 Ecological Context 

The route is located in the House River sub-basin within the Athabasca River Basin in northeast Alberta. 
The pipeline route crosses 8 watercourses, 4 fish-bearing drainages (i.e., 2 confirmed fish-bearing 
drainages and 2 potentially fish-bearing drainages) and 6 nonfish-bearing drainages. All 18 proposed 
crossings are within the House River sub-basin. The eight watercourse crossings include: five unnamed 
tributaries of Dropoff Creek (WC1, WC2, WC3, WC4 and WC5); Dropoff Creek (WC6); an unnamed 
tributary of the House River (WC7); and the House River (WC8).  

It is not expected that construction will encounter any springs as there are no known springs previously 
documented within 500 m of the pipeline centre line (ERCB/Alberta Geological Survey 2009). There are 
three wells within approximately 500 m of the pipeline route (AESRD 2014e).  

Land use plans have been developed by local governments for two areas along the pipeline route. The RM 
of Wood Buffalo has a land use plan with the objective of maintaining water quality through reducing 
pollution as well as protecting environmentally sensitive lands (RM of Wood Buffalo 2010c). The Lac La 
Biche County MDP has the goal of preserving natural areas (i.e., rivers, lakes, creeks) (Lac La Biche 
County 2013). An Integrated Watershed Management Plan for the Athabasca River watershed is currently 
under development by the Athabasca Watershed Council (AWC) (2012). The AWC is currently working to 
achieve goals of safe drinking water, healthy aquatic environments and reliable water quality by identifying 
environmental issues in the watershed, developing solutions to issues identified in the Athabasca State of 
the Watershed Report, and by providing watershed education and awareness (AWC 2012). There are no 
known Watershed Management Plans for any of the named watercourses crossed within the Aquatics RSA.  

TEK was gathered and recorded with community members of the Christina River Dene Nation Council, 
Saddle Lake Cree Nation and Willow Lake Métis Local No. 780 during the aquatics field studies for this 
Project throughout 2013 (Appendix 3). 

6.2.3.3 Potential Effects, Mitigation Measures and Potential Residual Effects 

The potential effects associated with the construction and operations of the pipeline on water quality and 
quantity were identified in consultation with Aboriginal communities and by the assessment team, and are 
listed in Table 6.2.6. Participants expressed issues and concerns including the potential for spills and 
contamination and the general water quality in the region for which mitigation measures are included in 
Table 6.2.6 and the EPP (Appendix 1). 

Standard pipeline construction activities are designed to avoid diversion and/or unnatural retention of water 
along the construction right-of-way by following recommendations from various industry and provincial 
guidelines (AENV 1988, 1994a, 1999, CAPP et al. 2012). In addition, applicable measures from several 
industry and provincial and federal regulatory guidelines have been incorporated into Table 6.2.6 to reduce 
the severity of the potential effects of the pipeline on water quality and quantity including: CAPP et al. 
(2012); Canadian Pipeline Environment Committee (2009); DFO (2013, 2014); and AENV (2000a,b), as 
well as in accordance with NGTL standards.  

TABLE 6.2.6 
 

POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF 
PIPELINE CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS ON WATER QUALITY AND QUANTITY 

Potential Effect Component 
Spatial 

Boundary1 Key Recommendations/Mitigation Measures [EPP Reference]2 
Potential Residual 

Effect(s) 
1. Alteration of natural 

surface water flow 
patterns 

Pipeline LSA • Leave gaps in windrows, at obvious drainages, on sidehill terrain 
and wherever seepage occurs to reduce interference with natural 
drainage patterns [Section 7.1]. 

• Localized alteration of 
natural surface water 
flow patterns until 
trench settlement is 
complete. 

 

 
   

Page 6-18 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.6  Cont'd 

Potential Effect Component 
Spatial 

Boundary1 Key Recommendations/Mitigation Measures [EPP Reference]2 
Potential Residual 

Effect(s) 
1. Alteration of natural 

surface water flow 
patterns (cont’d) 

See above See above • Direct grading away from waterbodies. Do not place fill material in 
a waterbody during grading [Section 8.4]. 

• Re-establish surface drainage patterns, install drainage and 
erosion control measures, and complete installation of 
sedimentation control measures at all watercourse crossings 
[Section 8.8]. 

• During final clean-up, remove subsoil, if used, overlying corduroy 
or geotextile and return the material to its pre-construction 
location unless otherwise requested or approved by the 
applicable government agency [Section 8.8]. 

• Install cross ditches and berms on moderately steep and steep 
slopes in order to prevent runoff along the right-of-way and 
subsequent erosion. Install berms immediately downslope of all 
trench breakers [Section 8.8]. 

• See additional mitigation measures in Section 6.2.8 Wetlands. 

• See above. 

2. Instability of trench 
at locations with 
high water table 

Pipeline LSA • If the trench requires dewatering, pump water onto stable, 
well-vegetated areas, tarpaulins, sheeting, rocks, sand bags, or 
into settling ponds, filter bags or other appropriate sediment 
filtering devices. Ensure dewatering is completed in a manner 
that does not cause erosion or allow sediment to re-enter a 
watercourse [Section 8.5]. 

• See additional mitigation measures in Section 6.2.8 Wetlands. 

• No residual effect 
identified. 

3. Disruption of 
streamflow 

Pipeline (at 
watercourses) 

LSA • During clearing fell trees towards the right-of-way, wherever 
possible. Recover trees that inadvertently fall into adjacent, 
undisturbed vegetation [Section 8.2]. 

• Ensure maintenance of downstream flow at all times when 
constructing an isolated crossing [Section 8.4]. 

• Ensure ice bridges or snowfills do not interfere with or impede 
winter flows [Section 8.4]. 

• Disruption of flow due to the withdrawal of hydrostatic test water 
is addressed in point 6 of this table. 

• No residual effect 
identified. 

4.  Reduction of 
surface water 
quality 

Pipeline RSA • Watercourse crossing requirements are provided in Table 2 and 
in Section 8.4 of the EPP, and are indicated on the Environmental 
Alignment Sheets (Appendix 2). 

• If the working surface is unstable, do not permit clearing 
equipment within the 10 m riparian buffer, unless approved by the 
Environmental Inspector(s). Following clearing, the 10 m riparian 
buffer will remain intact (i.e., consisting of low-lying understory 
vegetation) [Section 8.4]. 

• Direct grading away from waterbodies. Do not place fill material in 
a waterbody during grading [Section 8.4]. 

• Develop water quality monitoring plans to monitor for sediment 
events during instream construction activities as required by the 
applicable regulatory approvals (i.e., the DFO’s Self-Assessment 
Process and Measures to Avoid Causing Harm to Fish and Fish 
Habitat). If monitoring reveals sediment values are approaching 
threshold values, water quality monitors will alert the 
Environmental Inspector(s) and work with them to develop 
corrective actions. If corrective actions are not successful, 
construction activities will be temporarily suspended until effective 
solutions are identified [Section 8.4]. 

• Install cross ditches and berms on moderately steep and steep 
slopes in order to prevent runoff along the right-of-way and 
subsequent erosion. Install berms immediately downslope of all 
trench breakers [Section 8.8]. 

• Place only imported, clean, coarse material (gravel, rock) or 
native material removed from the trench, as the final 0.5 m of 
backfill. Any imported material must be obtained from a Company 
approved off-site location [Section 8.4]. 

• In the event of a spill, refer to the Spill Contingency Plan 
(Appendix 1E) [Section 8.1]. 

• A reduction in surface 
water quality due to 
suspended solids 
during instream 
construction of 
trenched pipeline 
crossings or vehicle 
crossings. 

• A reduction of surface 
water quality due to 
erosion from banks or 
approach slopes. 

• A reduction in surface 
water quality due to 
an inadvertent drilling 
mud release during 
HDD crossings. 

• A contamination of 
surface water due to 
spills during 
construction (e.g., fuel 
spills). 

 
   

Page 6-19 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.6  Cont'd 

Potential Effect Component 
Spatial 

Boundary1 Key Recommendations/Mitigation Measures [EPP Reference]2 
Potential Residual 

Effect(s) 
4.  Reduction of 

surface water 
quality (cont’d) 

See above See above • Bulk fuel trucks, service vehicles, and pick-up trucks equipped 
with box-mounted fuel tanks shall carry spill prevention, 
containment, and clean-up materials that are suitable for the 
volume of fuels or oils carried. Spill contingency material carried 
on bulk fuel and service vehicles shall be suitable for use on land 
and water [Section 8.1]. 

• Equipment to be used in or adjacent to a watercourse or 
waterbody will be clean or otherwise free of external grease, oil or 
other fluids, mud, soil and vegetation, prior to entering the 
waterbody [Section 8.1]. 

• In the event of sediment releases or spills of deleterious 
substances during construction of the trenchless crossings, 
implement Directional Drilling Procedures and Instream Drilling 
Mud Release Contingency Plan (Appendix 1E) [Section 8.4]. 

• See above. 

5.  Reduction in 
groundwater quality 
and quantity 

Pipeline LSA • Equipment to be used in or adjacent to a watercourse or 
waterbody will be clean or otherwise free of external grease, oil or 
other fluids, mud, soil and vegetation, prior to entering the 
waterbody [Section 8.1]. 

• If springs and groundwater are encountered, the Company will 
review the area and determine the appropriate mitigation 
[Section 7.1]. 

• A reduction in 
groundwater quality 
resulting from spills 
during construction. 

6. Alteration or 
contamination of 
aquatic 
environment as a 
result of withdrawal 
and release of 
hydrostatic test 
water 

Pipeline (test 
locations) 

LSA • Conduct all hydrostatic testing activities in accordance with the 
NEB Onshore Pipeline Regulations, provincial regulations, as well 
as the latest version of CSA Z662 and follow measures outlined 
in Section 8.7 of the EPP for hydrostatic testing.  

• See Section 6.2.12, human occupancy and resource sue, for 
discussion on potential effect of withdrawal of hydrostatic test 
water on downstream water users.  

• No residual effect 
identified. 

Notes: 1 LSA = Water Quality and Quantity LSA, RSA = Aquatics RSA. 
 2 Detailed mitigation measures are outlined in the Project-specific EPP (Appendix 1).  
 

6.2.3.4 Significance Evaluation of Potential Residual Effects 

A qualitative assessment was considered the most appropriate method to evaluate the significance of 
potential residual effects on water quality and quantity, due to the lack of quantitative data and accepted 
standards, guidelines and ecological thresholds. This qualitative assessment relied on available research 
literature and the professional judgement of the assessment team.  

A summary of the significance evaluation of potential residual environmental effects of the construction and 
operations of the pipeline on water quality and quantity is provided in Table 6.2.7. As noted, there are no 
waterbodies within 30 m of the proposed compressor station site. The rationale used to evaluate the 
significance of each of the residual environmental effects is provided below. An evaluation of significance 
was not required for those potential effects where no residual effect was identified (i.e., instability of trench 
at locations with high water table, disruption of streamflow, and alteration or contamination of aquatic 
environment as a result of withdrawal and release of hydrostatic test water). 

  

 
   

Page 6-20 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
TABLE 6.2.7 

 
CHARACTERIZATION OF POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS FOR  

EVALUATION OF SIGNIFICANCE – WATER QUALITY AND QUANTITY 

Potential Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
a. Localized alteration of 

natural surface water flow 
patterns until trench 
settlement is complete 

Impact balance: Negative Localized alteration of natural surface drainage patterns could cause localized pooling 
until trench settlement is complete. 

Spatial boundary: Water 
Quality and Quantity LSA 

Although alteration of natural drainage patterns is generally confined to the disturbed 
portion of the construction right-of-way, potential changes in hydrology may extend 
beyond the pipeline right-of-way. 

Duration: Short-Term The event causing alteration of natural drainage is construction of the pipeline. 
Frequency: Isolated The event causing alteration of natural drainage is confined to a specific period. 
Reversibility: Short to 
Medium-Term 

Precipitation levels can affects trench settlement and can vary annually. 

Magnitude: Low  Since the localized sunken trench or ponded water on the construction right-of-way will 
generally be within environmental standards. 

Probability: High Trench settlement and a remnant crown are likely to occur as a result of pipeline 
construction and, consequently, are likely to affect natural drainage patterns in localized 
areas. 

Confidence: High The assessment is based on a good understanding of cause-effect relationships and 
data pertinent to the Project area. 

Significance: Not Significant  The residual effect is of low magnitude and reversible in the short to medium-term and, 
therefore, not significant. 

b. Reduction in surface 
water quality due to 
suspended solids during 
instream construction of 
trenched pipeline 
crossings or vehicle 
crossings 

Impact balance: Negative Sediment release during instream activities (e.g., isolated or open cut crossing 
construction) could decrease surface water quality. 

Spatial boundary: Water 
Quality and Quantity LSA 

Suspended solids released during construction activities will be carried downstream 
until they disperse and/or naturally settle out. 

Duration: Short-Term The event causing the release of suspended solids into surface water is construction of 
the pipeline. 

Frequency: Isolated The event causing the release of suspended solids into surface water (i.e., construction 
of the pipeline) is confined to a specific period. 

Reversibility: Immediate to 
Short-Term 

An increase in suspended solids is confined to a specific period not exceeding 24 hours 
after construction for isolated crossings (i.e., immediate) or when open cut crossings 
first become inundated with water (i.e., short-term). 

Magnitude: Low Since an increase in suspended solids is anticipated for a short-term timeframe and 
anticipated to be within CCME guidelines, given the implementation of mitigation 
measures to reduce sedimentation. 

Probability: High The pipeline route crosses numerous watercourses for which the trenched isolated 
crossing method is recommended if water is present at the time of construction. 

Confidence: High The assessment is based on a good understanding of cause-effect relationships, 
scientific literature and data pertinent to the Project area. 

Significance: Not significant  The potential reduction in surface water quality is of low magnitude and reversible in the 
immediate to short-term and, therefore, not significant.  

c. Reduction of surface 
water quality due to 
erosion from banks or 
approach slopes 

Impact balance: Negative Erosion from banks and approach slopes could decrease surface water quality. 
Spatial boundary: Water 
Quality and Quantity LSA 

Suspended sediment caused by erosion will be carried downstream until sediments 
disperse and/or naturally settle out. 

Duration: Short-Term The event causing erosion and sedimentation of surface water is construction of the 
pipeline. 

Frequency: Isolated The event causing erosion and sedimentation is confined to a specific period. 
Reversibility: Short to 
Medium-Term 

For watercourses with gentle banks and approach slopes, vegetation may be re-
established on the approach slopes and banks within one year of construction while 
revegetation of steeper approach slopes and banks may take longer than one growing 
season. 

Magnitude: Low to Medium Depending on the amount of erosion that occurs and sensitivity of the receiving 
environment. 

Probability: High Although there are proven and effective industry standard mitigation measures used to 
control erosion on slopes and banks, the effect is still likely to occur. 

Confidence: High The assessment is based on a good understanding of cause-effect relationships and 
data pertinent to the Project area. 

Significance: Not Significant  The potential reduction in surface water quality is of low to medium magnitude and 
reversible in the short to medium-term and, therefore, not significant.  

 

 
   

Page 6-21 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.7  Cont’d 

Potential Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
d. Reduction in surface 

water quality due to an 
inadvertent drilling mud 
release during HDD 
crossings 

Impact balance: Negative Surface water quality could decrease from an accidental drilling mud release. 
Spatial boundary: Aquatics 
RSA 

Drilling mud released during construction activities may be carried downstream until it 
disperses and/or naturally settles out within the ZOI. Fine sediments from HDD drilling 
mud, should they occur, may carry beyond the Fish and Fish Habitat LSA.  

Duration: Immediate The event causing a decrease in surface water quality is the release of drilling mud, the 
period of which is less than or equal to two days. 

Frequency: Accidental The release of drilling mud into surface water occurs rarely over the assessment period. 
Reversibility: Immediate to 
Short-Term 

Suspended sediments resulting from a drilling mud release will likely settle out of 
suspension within 24 hours after the release; however, any sediments that result in 
deposition on the substrate of a watercourse are expected to be flushed from the 
system during the first annual flushing event following construction. 

Magnitude: Low to Medium Depending on the volume of the drilling mud release. 
Confidence: High The assessment is based on a good understanding of cause-effect relationships and 

data pertinent to the Project area. 
Probability: Low Mitigation measures will be implemented during HDD operations to prevent drilling mud 

release. 
Significance: Not significant  The potential reduction in surface water quality is of low to medium magnitude and 

reversible in the immediate to short-term and, therefore, not significant. 
e. Contamination of surface 

water due to spills during 
construction (e.g., fuel 
spills) 

Impact balance: Negative A spill to a waterbody would decrease surface water quality. 
Spatial boundary: Aquatics 
RSA 

Depending on the flow conditions of the contaminated waterbody, the effects of a spill 
could extend into the Aquatics RSA, although most spills are small and localized. 

Duration: Immediate The event causing a potential reduction in surface water quality is a spill, the period of 
which is less than or equal to two days. 

Frequency: Accidental A spill occurs rarely over the assessment period. 
Reversibility: Short to 
Medium-Term 

The effects of a spill are not expected to last beyond one year; however, may last 
longer depending on seasonal conditions and the extent and location of the spill. 

Magnitude: Low to High Based upon the volume, sensitivity of the receiving environment and contaminant 
released, although it is anticipated that most spills will be cleaned up during the 
construction period. 

Probability: Low Due to mitigation measures in place to reduce the potential for surface water spills 
reaching waterbodies and affecting surface water quality. 

Confidence: Moderate Spill location and effects of accidental spills cannot be accurately predicted. 
Significance: Not Significant  Contamination of surface water as a result of construction activities is considered low 

probability and is reversible in the short to medium-term, depending on the severity of a 
spill and, therefore, not significant.  

f. Reduction in groundwater 
quality resulting from 
spills during construction 

Impact balance: Negative A spill could cause contamination of groundwater. 
Spatial boundary: Water 
Quality and Quantity LSA 

Any spill into groundwater during construction activities could be transported by the 
groundwater beyond the construction right-of-way, however, based on professional 
experience, the effects of most minor spills are localized. 

Duration: Immediate The event causing decrease in groundwater quality is a spill, the period of which is less 
than or equal to two days. 

Frequency: Accidental Spills into groundwater occur rarely over the assessment period. 
Reversibility: Short to 
Long-Term 

The effects of a spill are not expected to last beyond one year, but may last longer 
depending upon the extent and source of the spill. 

Magnitude: Low to High Based upon the volume, sensitivity of the receiving environment and contaminant 
released, although it is anticipated that most spills will be cleaned up during the 
construction period. 

Probability: Low Since established mitigation measures are expected to prevent a spill from occurring 
and migrating into the subsurface and affecting groundwater quality. 

Confidence: Moderate Spill location and effects of accidental spills cannot be accurately predicted. 
Significance: Not Significant  A reduction in groundwater quality as a result of construction activities is considered to 

have a low probability of occurrence and, therefore, not significant.  
g. Combined effects on 

water quality  
Impact balance: Negative The combined effects of the individual potential residual effects could act in 

combination to reduce water quality. 
Spatial boundary: Water 
Quality and Quantity LSA 

Combined effects on surface water quality may extend past the construction right-of-
way. 

Duration: Short-Term The event causing the combined effects on surface water quality is construction of the 
pipeline. 

Frequency: Isolated The event causing the combined effects on surface water quality (i.e., construction of 
the pipeline) is confined to a specific period. 

 
   

Page 6-22 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.7  Cont’d 

Potential Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
g. Combined effects on 

water quality (cont’d) 
Reversibility: Short to 
Medium-Term 

Combined effects on surface water quality may take more than two days to return to 
baseline conditions. 

Magnitude: Low to Medium Combined effects on water quality are anticipated to be within environmental and/or 
regulatory standards. 

Probability: High The pipeline route crosses a number of watercourses for which the above effects can 
act in combination to reduce surface water quality. 

Confidence: High The assessment is based on a good understanding of cause-effect relationships, 
scientific literature and data pertinent to the Project area. 

Significance: Not Significant  The combined effects on water quality are considered to be of low to medium 
magnitude and reversible in the short to medium-term and, therefore, not significant. 

Note: Significant Residual Environmental Effect: A high probability of occurrence of a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot 
be technically or economically mitigated. 

 

Localized Alteration of Natural Surface Water Flow Patterns  
With successful implementation of the proposed industry accepted standard mitigation measures, 
disruption of surface flow patterns following construction is expected to be minor along the pipeline route. 
However, construction activities may contribute to some localized alteration of natural surface drainage 
patterns until trench settlement is complete. The impact balance of this potential residual effect is 
considered negative since it could decrease surface water quality and/or quantity. However, with successful 
implementation of the proposed mitigation measures, disruption of surface flow patterns following 
construction is likely to be minor along the entire pipeline route.  

In the event that construction or maintenance activities result in changes in surface water regimes, 
corrective action, in consultation with the appropriate authorities, will be conducted to resolve the issue. 
The PCM Program will identify locations of altered drainage patterns (e.g., trench subsidence, ponded 
water) and remedial work will be conducted. Consequently, the residual effect is reversible in the short to 
medium-term. Generally, the residual effect of ponded water on the right-of-way is considered to be within 
environmental standards and, therefore, is of low magnitude (Table 6.2.7, point [a]).  

Reduction in Surface Water Quality During Instream Activities 
The selection of appropriate watercourse crossing techniques, designed to meet federal and provincial 
regulatory requirements, as well as implementation of erosion controls on the approaches to watercourse 
crossings and riparian revegetation, are likely to substantially reduce the potential for adverse effects on 
surface water quality at watercourses encountered along the pipeline route. During construction of isolated 
crossings, a minor and short-term sediment release is expected during installation and removal of the 
vehicle crossing or isolation structure. The impact balance for this potential residual effect is considered to 
be negative since it could decrease surface water quality.  

Recent evidence demonstrates that smaller watercourses that lack substantial subsurface flow can be 
readily isolated with minimal sediment introduction when proper design, construction and mitigation 
measures are applied (CAPP et al. 2012, Reid et al. 2002). Consequently, it is anticipated that average 
total suspended solids (TSS) levels during instream construction at these sites will be below the CCME 
guidelines for short-term (24 hour) exposure of 25 mg/L above baseline levels (CCME 2002, 2007). Aquatic 
resources are protected by ensuring that concentration of TSS concentration does not exceed 
CCME (2002, 2007) guidelines. A biologically important increase in TSS concentration above baseline is 
25 mg/L based on the Canadian guideline for short-term (24 hour) exposure (CCME 2002, 2007). 
AENV’s (1999) guideline of 10 mg/L TSS is based on chronic or long-term exposure to elevated suspended 
solids.  

DFO (2000) indicates that concentrations < 25 mg/L, 25-100 mg/L, 100-200 mg/L, 200-400 mg/L and > 400 
mg/L have very low, low, moderate, high and unacceptable risks, respectively. Additional background on 
these risk levels is discussed in Birtwell (1999). 

 
   

Page 6-23 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Water quality monitoring will be used when activities occur that have the potential to cause events that may 
exceed the guidelines. Any exceedances of the relevant guidelines will be reported to the appropriate 
regulatory agencies. Minor releases of sediment may be associated with the use of temporary vehicle 
crossings at trenched crossing locations. Although elevated suspended sediment concentrations may result 
from instream construction and vehicle crossing use, pulses of suspended solids are generally expected to 
settle out of the water column within the ZOI in a timeframe measuring from minutes to a few hours (i.e., less 
than the short-term guideline of 24 hours). Therefore, residual effects on water quality during the 
recommended trenched crossings are reversible in the immediate to short-term and of low magnitude 
(Table 6.2.7, point [b]).  

Reduction in Surface Water Quality Due to Erosion from Banks or Approach Slopes  
Following grading, it is likely that some erosion will occur on banks and approach slopes causing 
sedimentation of surface water. The impact balance of this potential residual effect is considered negative 
since the erosion could decrease water quality. Although sedimentation due to erosion from banks and 
approach slopes is considered to have high probability to occur, the proposed mitigation measures are 
expected to reduce the magnitude of erosion on surface water quality to low to medium levels, depending 
on the amount of erosion that occurs. This residual effect is reversible in the short to medium-term 
(Table 6.2.7, point [c]).  

Inadvertent Drilling Mud Release 
A reduction of water quality of surface water has the potential to occur as a result of a drilling mud release 
during HDD crossings. The impact balance of this residual effect is considered negative since the release 
could decrease water quality. The bentonite mud used in HDD crossings is inert; preventing potential 
chemical contamination of surface water resulting from a drilling mud release. Although sedimentation may 
occur, the proposed mitigation measures are expected to reduce the magnitude of a drilling mud release 
on surface water quality. This residual effect is reversible in the immediate to short-term and is of low to 
medium magnitude (Table 6.2.7, point [d]).  

Contamination of Surface Water Due to Spills  
A spill during construction could cause contamination of the surface water and would be considered to have 
a negative impact balance. However, spill prevention measures outlined in Table 6.2.6 and the EPP will be 
followed. Therefore, residual effects on surface water due to spills are reversible in the short to medium-term 
and of low probability (Table 6.2.7, point [e]).  

Reduction in Groundwater Quality  
High water tables may be encountered at some locations along the pipeline route. The impact balance of a 
spill during construction or operations is considered to be negative since the spill could reduce groundwater 
quality. With the implementation of clean-up and remediation measures, spills potentially affecting 
groundwater are considered to be of low to high magnitude and reversible in the short to long-term and the 
probability of a spill entering the groundwater is considered low (Table 6.2.7 point [f]).  

Combined Effects on Water Quality  
An evaluation of the combined effects considers those residual effects that are likely to occur and, therefore, 
residual effects [d], [e] and [f] in Table 6.2.7 are not considered in the evaluation of combined effects on 
water quality and quantity since the probability of these effects occurring is low. Consequently, the 
combined effects evaluation considers the individual potential residual effects evaluated (points [b] and [c] 
of Table 6.2.7) that are likely to occur and could act in combination on water quality and quantity. The 
disturbance of surface water quality due to localized alteration of natural drainage patterns until trench 
settlement is complete (point [a] in Table 6.2.7) is considered independent and not considered in the 
combined effects on water quality. 

The following potential residual effects are likely to act in combination to result in overall effects on water 
quality: 

• reduction in surface water quality due to suspended solids during instream construction 
of trenched pipeline crossings or vehicle crossings; and 

 
   

Page 6-24 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
• reduction of surface water quality due to erosion from banks or approach slopes. 

The adverse effects identified have the potential to act in combination on waterbodies encountered by the 
pipeline route. Reversibility of this residual effect is considered short to medium-term depending on the 
waterbody encountered and the probability of these residual effects acting in combination at any specific 
location along the pipeline route. However, the magnitude of the combined effects on water quality is 
considered low to medium since the residual effect is within environmental and/or regulatory standards 
(Table 6.2.7, point [g]).  

6.2.3.5 Summary 

As identified in Table 6.2.7, there are no situations with regard to water quality and quantity where there is 
a high probability of occurrence of a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot 
be technically or economically mitigated. Consequently, it is concluded that the residual environmental 
effects of pipeline construction and operations on water quality or quantity will be not significant. 

6.2.4 Air Emissions 

6.2.4.1 Spatial Boundaries 

The spatial boundaries used in the effects assessment of air emissions considered the following area: 

• the Air Emissions RSA. 

An Air Emissions RSA was established to consider the maximum area where Project-specific environmental 
effects and cumulative environmental effects on air quality are likely to occur. The spatial boundaries of the 
Air Emissions RSA have been defined as a 5 km wide band centred on the proposed construction 
right-of-way (i.e., 2.5 km on both sides of the construction right-of-way) and a 12 km by 12 km area centred 
on the compressor station. The Air Emissions RSA is shown in Figure 5.3. The Air Quality RSA boundary 
was defined based on expert knowledge and previous experience. It was defined such that it provides a 
representative analysis of the effects of the Project on the atmospheric environment and on any sensitive 
receptors. Other factors considered in determining the size of the study area include the nature and 
magnitude of the Project-related emissions against the existing environment (i.e., dust). In addition, smoke 
from burning and vehicular emissions will not be detectable beyond the Air Quality RSA and, therefore, the 
Air Emissions RSA is considered to represent the distance from the Project that air emissions associated 
with the Project are likely to be detectable.  

An Air Emissions LSA was not established for the Project since local effects from air emissions are included 
in the assessment for the RSA and warrant no separate assessment.  

6.2.4.2 Project Related Air Emissions 

An Air Quality and GHG Assessment was conducted by RWDI to quantitatively assess the potential Project 
effects on air quality through comparison of Project related air emissions to national and provincial air 
emissions, where available (Table 5.5.1). Details regarding the air quality assessment are provided in 
Appendix 4 including methodology, sources and assumptions used to calculate air emissions for the 
Project. To align with the methodology used by TERA in this assessment (see Section 6.1), RWDI assessed 
the Project as defined in Section 2.0 to include pipeline and compressor station components in order to 
support the spatial and temporal boundaries deemed appropriate for each element. This decision is specific 
for the Project and was based on the professional experience of the assessment team. Therefore, 
Project-related air emissions were considered for this Project to include pipeline and compressor station 
construction and operations (including site-specific maintenance). 

Project-related air emissions associated with construction and operations are summarized in Section 5.4 
and includes NOx, and PM2.5. Table 6.2.8 provides the calculated air emissions for all Project components 
(i.e., pipeline and compressor station) during construction and operations (including maintenance activities) 
of the Project (as defined in Section 1.4). Harvesting details can be found in the EPP (Appendix 1).  

 
   

Page 6-25 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
TABLE 6.2.8 

 
AIR EMISSIONS ASSOCIATED WITH PROJECTCONSTRUCTION, AND OPERATIONS  

CONSTRUCTION1 

Project Component 
Emissions (tonnes) 

NOx PM2.5 
Pipeline 9.3 16.3 
Compressor Station 17.9 0.7 
Land clearing (including open burning 
emissions)3 

3.22 6.44 

TOTAL 30.42 23.52 
Percent of 2012 National Emissions 0.0016  0.0086 

OPERATIONS 
Project Component Emissions (tonnes per year) 

Pipeline <0.01 N/A 
Compressor (14067 kW) 54.4 3.95 
Boiler (492 kW) 1.08 0.63 
TOTAL 55.42 4.582 
Percent of 2012 National Emissions 0.0030 0.0017 

Source: NGTL Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and Leismer East Compressor Station Project Air Quality and Greenhouse Gas 
Assessment (Appendix 4) 

Notes: 1 Assumed construction period was 9 months; calculations made prior to final construction schedule. 
 2 Land clearing calculations are provided as a worst-case scenario. Harvesting details can be found in the EPP (Appendix 1). 
 3 The sum of the values in the table may not equal the total due to rounding. 
 

6.2.4.3 Potential Effects, Mitigation Measures and Potential Residual Effects 

The potential effects associated with the construction and operations of the Project on air emissions were 
identified by the assessment team and are listed in Table 6.2.9.  

Mitigation measures included in Table 6.2.9 were principally developed in accordance with industry and 
provincial regulatory guidelines including Cheminfo Services Inc. (Cheminfo) (2005) and Canadian 
Association of Petroleum Producers (CAPP) (2007), as well as in accordance with NGTL’s standards of 
practice.  

Effects on air emissions as a result of the Project are expected to be intermittent and well below established 
regulatory standards. Through the implementation of mitigation measures, it is believed that the Project 
meets the primary objective of the Wood Buffalo MDP to protect and enhance of air quality (MD of Wood 
Buffalo 2011) and the LARP to manage air emissions to maintain acceptable air quality (AESRD 2012). 

  

 
   

Page 6-26 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
TABLE 6.2.9 

 
POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND RESIDUAL 

EFFECTS OF PROJECT CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS ON AIR EMISSIONS 

Potential Effect Component 
Spatial 

Boundary1 
Key Recommendations/Mitigation Measures 

[EPP Reference]2 
Potential Residual 

Effect(s) 
1. Project contribution 

to CAC emissions 
Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

RSA • Where practical, use multi-passenger vehicles for the transport of 
crews to and from job sites [Section 8.1]. 

• The Contractor will ensure equipment is well-maintained and free of 
fluid leaks [Section 8.1]. 

• Reduce idling of equipment, where possible [Section 8.1]. 
• Reduce the amount of emissions associated with clearing of 

vegetation by following existing linear disturbances, where feasible. 
• Reduce CAC emissions through design of the proposed compressor 

station.  

• Increase in CAC 
emissions during 
construction and 
site-specific 
maintenance 
activities. 

• Increase in CAC 
emissions during 
operation of the 
compressor 
station.  

2. Smoke and dust 
during construction 
and operations  

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

RSA • Only burn slash if permission is granted from the regulating 
authorities and if conditions permit. If burning is delayed, store slash 
along the right-of-way or at the facility site, in approved push-outs. All 
burning will be completed in accordance with the applicable 
regulations and permits [Section 8.1]. 

• Obtain applicable permits prior to burning slash. Follow guidance in 
the applicable regulations (Alberta Reg. 310/72) [Section 8.2]. 

• Do not conduct burning within 100 m of a waterbody, unless 
otherwise authorized by the Environmental Inspector(s) [Section 8.2]. 

• Implement techniques to limit smoke production including limiting pile 
size, minimizing moisture content and maintaining loose burning piles 
with minimal soil [Section 8.2]. 

• Avoid locating burn piles on peat-rich areas where residual fires 
could persist after construction. Burn piles will be located on areas 
where strippings have been removed [Section 8.2]. 

• Confirm burn piles are properly extinguished. Conduct infrared 
scanning of burn pile locations to locate any hot spots [Section 8.8] 

• Limit the disturbance to vegetation (i.e., merchantable timber and 
native vegetation) to the extent practical [Section 8.2]. 

• Control dust on the access road leading to the proposed compressor 
station during operations activities, if warranted. 

• Prohibit the use of refined oil for dust control on roads during 
maintenance activities. 

• Increase in smoke 
and fugitive dust 
during 
construction and 
operations.  

Notes: 1 RSA = Air Emissions RSA. 
 2 Detailed mitigation measures are outlined in the Project-specific EPP (Appendix 1). 
 

6.2.4.4 Significance Evaluation of Potential Residual Effects 

A combination of quantitative and qualitative methods was considered appropriate to evaluate the 
significance of potential residual effects on air quality. This assessment relied on the results of the Air 
Quality and GHG Assessment (Appendix 4) and available research literature and the professional 
judgement of the assessment team. 

Table 6.2.10 provides the rationale used to evaluate the significance of each of the potential residual 
environmental effects and significance evaluation of construction and operations of the Project on air 
quality. All assessment criteria were considered when determining the significance of each residual effect, 
however, the most influential assessment criteria were magnitude and reversibility. Refer to Section 6.2.16 
for a discussion of nuisance emissions during construction and operations and their effects on human 
health. 

  

 
   

Page 6-27 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
TABLE 6.2.10 

 
CHARACTERIZATION OF RESIDUAL EFFECTS  

FOR EVALUATION OF SIGNIFICANCE - AIR EMISSIONS 

Potential Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
a. Increase in CAC 

emissions during 
construction and 
site-specific maintenance 
activities  

Impact Balance: Negative Construction and site-specific maintenance activities will result in decreased air quality. 
Spatial Boundary: Air 
Emissions RSA 

Potential increases in CAC emissions resulting from construction and site-specific 
maintenance activities (e.g., aerial overflights, integrity digs) will dissipate within the Air 
Quality RSA. 

Duration: Short-Term The events causing increases in CAC emissions (i.e., construction of the pipeline and 
site-specific maintenance activity events [e.g., aerial overflights, integrity digs]) are 
limited to the construction phase or are completed within any 1 year during the 
operations phase. 

Frequency: Isolated 
(during construction) to Periodic 
(during operations) 

The events causing increases in CAC emissions (i.e., construction of the pipeline and 
site-specific maintenance activities) are confined to a specific period or are periodic 
during site-specific maintenance activities. Site-specific maintenance activities 
(e.g., aerial overflights, integrity digs) will occur intermittently, however, repeatedly, over 
the assessment period. 

Reversibility: Short-Term The effects are expected to reverse once construction or the maintenance activity is 
complete. 

Magnitude: Low (during 
operations) to Medium (during 
construction) 

An increase in CAC emissions will occur during construction however, emissions will be 
within regulatory limits. Brief episodes of medium magnitude concentrations of CAC 
emissions may occur during construction activities. Project related emissions during 
site-specific maintenance activities will be detectable but within normal variability of 
baseline conditions. 

Probability: High The equipment and vehicles associated with construction and site-specific maintenance 
activities (e.g., aerial overflights, integrity digs) will emit CAC emissions. 

Confidence: Moderate Emissions data were based on the RWDI Air Quality and GHG Assessment 
(Appendix 4), however, the assessment of residual air quality effects is based on the 
experience of the assessment team. 

Significance: Not Significant  The increase in CAC emissions as a result of construction and site-specific 
maintenance activities is of low to medium magnitude and is reversible in the short-term 
and, therefore, not significant.  

b.  Increase in CAC 
emissions during 
operation of the 
compressor station 

Impact balance: Negative The operation of the compressor station will decrease air quality.  
Spatial boundary: Air 
Emissions RSA 

Potential increases in CAC emissions during the operation of the compressor station 
will dissipate within the Air Quality RSA. 

Duration: Long-term The event causing increases in CAC emissions is the operation of the compressor 
station which has an expected operating life of approximately 40 years. 

Frequency: Continuous The event causing increases in CAC emissions (i.e., operation of the compressor 
station) will occur continuously over the assessment period. 

Reversibility: Long-term CAC emissions are expected to reverse in the long-term once the compressor station is 
decommissioned or abandoned.  

Magnitude: Low An increase in CAC emissions during operation of the compressor station will be 
detectable, but are well within applicable environmental and regulatory standards and 
will occur at substantial distances from any potential receptors.  

Probability: High The operation of the compressor station will emit CAC emissions. 
Confidence: Moderate Emissions were based on the RWDI Air Quality and GHG Assessment (Appendix 4) 

and dispersion modeling which relied on assumptions from past projects of similar 
nature. The assessment of residual air quality effects is based on the experience of the 
assessment team. 

Significance: Not Significant  The increase in air emissions as a result of the compressor station operations is of low 
magnitude and is reversible in the long-term and, therefore, not significant.  

c.  Increase in fugitive dust 
and smoke during 
construction and 
operations (from unpaved 
access road) 

Impact balance: Negative Construction and operations (i.e., site-specific maintenance activities) will result in 
decreased local air quality.  

Spatial boundary: Air Quality 
RSA 

Potential increases in fugitive dust and smoke resulting from construction and 
operations of the Project will dissipate within the Air Quality RSA. 

Duration: Short-term The events causing increases in fugitive dust and smoke (i.e., construction of the 
pipeline and site-specific maintenance activity events [e.g., vegetation management, 
integrity digs, etc.]) are limited to the construction phase or are completed within any 
1 year during the operations phase. 

Frequency: Isolated 
(during construction) to Periodic 
(during operations) 

The events causing a potential increase in fugitive dust and smoke are confined to a 
specific period (i.e., construction and site-specific maintenance activities) or will occur 
intermittently, however, repeatedly over the assessment period (e.g., vegetation 
management, integrity digs, etc.).  

 
   

Page 6-28 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.10  Cont’d 

Potential Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
c.  Increase in fugitive dust 

and smoke during 
construction and 
operations (from unpaved 
access road) (cont’d) 

Reversibility: Immediate to 
Short-term  

Fugitive dust and smoke associated with construction and operations (i.e., site-specific 
maintenance activities) are expected to dissipate within two days or within 1 year. 

Magnitude: Low The increase in fugitive dust and smoke during construction and site-specific 
maintenance activities will be detectable but well within regulatory standards. 

Probability: High Activities associated with construction and site-specific maintenance activities (e.g., 
vehicle and equipment operation and open burning during land clearing) will result in 
fugitive dust and smoke.  

Confidence: Moderate Based on the experience of the assessment team.  
Significance: Not Significant  The increase in fugitive dust and smoke as a result of construction and site-specific 

maintenance activities is of low magnitude and is reversible in the immediate to short-
term and, therefore, not significant.  

d.  Combined effects on air 
quality 

Impact balance: Negative Combined effects on air quality will result in decreased air quality. 
Spatial boundary: Air Quality 
RSA 

Potential combined effects on air quality during the construction and operations of the 
Project will dissipate within the Air Quality RSA. 

Duration: Long-term Potential combined effects on air quality include CAC emissions during operation of the 
compressor station and fugitive dust and smoke during site-specific maintenance 
activities. 

Frequency: Continuous The potential for combined effects on air quality will occur continuously (CAC emissions 
during operation of the compressor station) over the assessment period. 

Reversibility: Long-term Potential combined effects on air quality will be reversible following the 
decommissioning or abandonment of the Project. 

Magnitude: Low to Medium Potential combined effects on air quality during operations and site-specific 
maintenance activities of the Project will be detectable, but well within applicable 
environmental and regulatory standards. During construction brief episodes of air 
emissions may approach, but remain within the environmental and/or regulatory 
standards. 

Probability: High Potential effects on air quality associated with the Project are likely to occur in 
combination over the assessment period.  

Confidence: Moderate Emissions were based on the RWDI Air Quality and GHG Assessment (Appendix 4) 
which relied on assumptions from past projects of similar nature however, the 
assessment of combined residual air quality effects is based on the experience of the 
assessment team. 

Significance: Not Significant Potential combined effects on air quality as a result of the Project are of low to medium 
magnitude and reversible in the long-term and, therefore, not significant. 

Note:  Significant Residual Environmental Effect: A high probability of occurrence of a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot 
be technically or economically mitigated. 

 

Increase in CAC Emissions During Construction and Site-Specific Maintenance Activities 
Ambient air quality in the Air Emissions RSA for the Project is considered to be good, with rare occurrences 
of degraded air quality. Increases in CAC emissions as a result of the Project are anticipated but are 
expected to be well within the AAAQO (Appendix 4). 

The CACs of interest expected to be emitted during construction and site-specific maintenance include NOx 
and PM2.5. Should the burning of slash be conducted, there will be a small increase in NOx, CO and PM2.5. 
The primary source of CAC emissions during construction will be from land clearing, open burning and 
vehicle and equipment operation. Off-road equipment operation and removal of vegetation and soil, and 
truck loading will be the largest source of PM2.5 and may result in brief episodes of high ambient 
concentrations in close proximity to Project construction activities, which is common to any typical 
construction activity. This residual effect is confined to construction and site-specific maintenance activities 
completed during dry, non-frozen conditions. Periodic helicopter use during aerial patrol for site-specific 
maintenance and operations will also result in increased CAC emissions. The amount of CAC emissions 
associated with construction and site-specific maintenance activities and operations will be reduced by 
utilizing well-maintained vehicles, reducing vehicle and equipment idling, and smoke control measures. 

The residual effects of increased CAC emissions during construction and site-specific maintenance 
activities are considered to have a negative impact balance and high probability of occurring. The increase 

 
   

Page 6-29 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
in air emissions is anticipated to be of low to medium magnitude and reversible in the short-term 
(Table 6.2.10, point [a]).  

Increase in CAC Emissions During Operation of the Compressor Station 
Operational emissions at the proposed Leismer East Compressor Station facility will be dominated by a 
compressor and boiler at the compressor station. Oxides of nitrogen (NOx) are the primary emissions of 
concern from the natural gas fuelled compressor unit and boiler. Given that the compressor station 
proposed for the Project is relatively small, emissions of CO are not expected to be a concern. The Air 
Quality and GHG Assessment (Appendix 4) focuses on detailed analyses of predicted NOx and PM2.5 
concentrations caused by the operation of the compressor station and summarizes the modelling results 
for NOx and PM2.5. No other emissions of concern are expected from the operation of the compressor 
station. 

All modelling was performed following the Alberta Environment Air Quality Model Guideline. All of the 
predicted concentrations were found to be less than existing AAAQO and guidelines. A recommendation 
for ambient air quality monitoring has not been made. Since residual effects are detectable but within 
regulatory standards, the magnitude is low (Table 6.2.10, element [b]). 

Dust and Smoke During Construction and Operations 
Smoke may be associated with open burning during land clearing in the construction phase of the Project. 
As a result of the proposed mitigation measures outlined in Table 6.2.9, this residual effect is reversible in 
the short-term and of low magnitude (Table 6.2.10, point [c]). 

Construction activities and site-specific maintenance activities during operations will also cause emissions 
of fugitive dust. Sources of fugitive dust include: travel of vehicles on unpaved roads, removal of soil, and 
truck loading. This residual effect is confined to construction phase or operations activities completed during 
relatively dry, nonfrozen conditions. This residual effect is reversible in the immediate to short-term and, as 
a result of the proposed mitigation measures proposed in Table 6.2.9, is of low magnitude (Table 6.2.10, 
point [c]). 

Combined Effects on Air Quality 
An evaluation of the combined effects considers those potential residual effects that are likely to occur and 
therefore, the combined effects evaluation considers the individual potential residual effects evaluated that 
are likely to occur and could act in combination. 

The following potential residual effects are likely to act in combination to result in overall effects on air 
emissions during construction and operations of the Project: 

• increase in CAC emissions (Table 6.2.10, points [a] and [b]); and 

• increase in fugitive dust and smoke during construction or site-specific maintenance 
(e.g., vegetation maintenance, integrity digs, etc.) (Table 6.2.10, point [c]).  

The combined effects of the Project on air quality are reversible in the long-term and of low to medium 
magnitude (Table 6.2.10, point [d]). 

6.2.4.5 Summary 

As identified in Table 6.2.10, there are no situations with regard to air emissions where there is a high 
probability of occurrence of a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude. Consequently, it is 
concluded that the residual environmental effects of the Project construction and operations (i.e., pipeline, 
compressor station and access road) on air quality will be not significant. 

 
   

Page 6-30 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
6.2.5 Greenhouse Gas Emissions 

6.2.5.1 Spatial Boundaries 

An international spatial boundary was used in the effects assessment of GHG emissions, because GHGs 
are associated with climate change, which is of global scale.  

An Air Quality and GHG Assessment was conducted by RWDI to quantitatively assess the potential Project 
effects on GHG emissions through comparison of Project related GHG emissions to national and provincial 
GHG emissions (Table 5.5.1). Details regarding the GHG assessment are provided in Appendix 4 including 
the methodology, sources and assumptions used to calculate GHG emissions for the Project. To align with 
the methodology used by TERA in this assessment (see Section 6.1), RWDI assessed the Project as 
defined in Section 1.0 to include pipeline and compressor station components in order to support the spatial 
and temporal boundaries deemed appropriate for each element. This decision is specific for the Project and 
was based on the professional experience of the assessment team. Therefore, Project-related GHG 
emissions were considered for this Project to include pipeline and compressor station construction and 
operations.  

Project-related GHG emissions associated with construction and operations are summarized in Section 5.5 
and will include CO2, CH4 and N2O and are also expressed as CO2e Table 6.2.11 provides details of the 
GHG emissions associated with the Project during construction and operations (including maintenance 
activities). As noted, land clearing calculations are provided as a worst-case scenario. An environmentally 
responsible and economically efficient timber harvest operations incorporating Best Management Practices 
will be carried out along the proposed Project Footprint (as defined in Section 1.4). Harvesting details can 
be found in the EPP (Appendix 1). 

TABLE 6.2.11 
 

GHG EMISSIONS ASSOCIATED WITH PROJECT CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS  

CONSTRUCTION1 

Project Component 
Emissions (tonnes) 

CO2 CH4 N2O CO2e 
Pipeline 1,740 0.07 0.42 1,860 
Compressor Station 2,660 0.12 0.85 2,920 
Land clearing (including open 
burning emissions)4 

2,610 9.97 2.09 3,480 

TOTAL 7,0102 10.22 3.362 8,2602 
Percent of 2012 Provincial 
(AB) Emissions 

0.0035 0.0006 0.0080 0.0033 

Percent of 2012 National 
Emissions 

0.0013 0.0002 0.0022 0.0012 

OPERATIONS  
Project Component Emissions (tonnes per year) 

Pipeline 9.73 0.0009 0.0009 10.0 
Compressor (14067 kW) 85,700 84.9 2.23 88,500 
Boiler (492 kW) 981 0.02 0.02 988 
Fugitive emissions 10.9 205 -4 5,130 
TOTAL 86,7002 3543 2.253 96,2003 
Percent of 2012 Provincial 
(AB) Emissions 

0.0434 0.0208 0.0054 0.0386 

Percent of 2012 National 
Emissions 

0.0157 0.0082 0.0015 0.0138 

Source: NGTL Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and Leismer East Compressor Station Project Air Quality and Greenhouse Gas 
Assessment (Appendix 4) 

Notes: 1 Assumed construction period is 9 months. 
 2 Land clearing calculations are provided as a worst-case scenario. Harvesting details can be found in the EPP (Appendix 1). 
 3 The sum of the values in the table may not equal the total due to rounding. 
 4 “-“ designates measure is not applicable. 
 

 
   

Page 6-31 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Direct GHG emissions during operations are attributed to the operation of the compressor station, the fuel 
consumption for maintenance vehicles and equipment and fugitive emissions. The total annual direct GHG 
emissions resulting from Project operations are estimated to be 94,600 tonnes CO2e per year. The Project’s 
contribution to the total 2012 annual provincial and national CO2e emissions are expected to be 
approximately 0.0386% and 0.0138%, respectively.  

6.2.5.2 Potential Effects, Mitigation Measures and Potential Residual Effects 

The potential effects associated with the construction and operations of the Project on GHG emissions were 
identified through the professional experience of the assessment team and are listed in Table 6.2.11.  

Mitigation measures included in Table 6.2.12 were principally developed in accordance with industry and 
provincial regulatory guidelines including Cheminfo (2005) and CAPP (2007), as well as in accordance with 
NGTL’s Standards of Practice and TransCanada’s Climate Change Strategy (TransCanada 2014a). Project 
effects on GHG emissions were assessed using a comparison of Project-related GHG emissions with 
national and provincial GHG emissions as described in Section 5.5 and as mandated by Incorporating 
Climate Change Considerations in Environmental Assessment: General Guidance for Practitioners (CEA 
Agency 2003). Mitigation measures identified for GHG emissions are similar to those identified for CAC 
emissions in the air emissions assessment due to similar emission sources (Table 6.2.9). 

Through the implementation of mitigation measures, it is believed that the Project meets the primary 
objective of the Wood Buffalo MDP to reduce GHG emissions (MD of Wood Buffalo 2011). 

The Project will become part of the NGTL system, which is considered a single facility under SGER 
(AESRD 2014e). Project emissions and product throughput are on the order of several percent of NGTL 
system totals and will be included in the total emission intensity calculation of the NGTL system. These are 
submitted under SGER as part of the existing obligation, because total annual system GHG emissions 
exceed the 100,000 tonnes CO2e threshold of SGER. Therefore, the Project will not trigger additional 
regulatory requirements. 

TABLE 6.2.12 
 

POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND RESIDUAL  
EFFECTS OF PROJECT CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS ON GHG EMISSIONS 

Potential Effect Component 
Spatial 

Boundary Recommendations/Mitigation Measures [EPP Reference]1 
Potential Residual 

Effect(s) 
1. Project 

contribution to 
GHG emission 
levels 

Pipeline and 
compressor station 

International • Reduce the amount of GHG emissions associated with 
clearing of vegetation by routing the pipeline along existing 
linear disturbances, to the extent practical.  

• Where practical, use multi-passenger vehicles for the 
transport of crews to and from job sites [Section 8.1]. 

• The Contractor will ensure equipment is well-maintained 
[Section 8.1]. 

• Reduce idling of equipment, where possible [Section 8.1]. 
• NGTL will integrate the aerial patrol of the Project within its 

on-going operations and maintenance program. 

• Increase in GHG 
emissions during 
construction and 
site-specific 
maintenance 
activities. 

• Increase in GHG 
emissions during 
operation of the 
compressor 
station and 
pipeline. 

Note: 1 Detailed mitigation measures are outlined in the Project-specific EPP (Appendix 1). 
 

6.2.5.3 Significance Evaluation of Potential Residual Effects 

Table 6.2.13 provides a summary of the significance evaluation of potential residual environmental effects 
of the construction and operations of the Project on GHG emissions. A combination of quantitative and 
qualitative methods was considered the most appropriate method to evaluate the significance of potential 
residual effects on GHG emissions. The assessment considered the results of the Air Quality and GHG 
Assessment (Appendix 4), and applicable guidelines (e.g., Incorporating Climate Change Considerations 
in Environmental Assessment: General Guidance for Practitioners [CEA Agency 2003]). The assessment 
relied on the data provided by RWDI (Appendix 4) and on the professional judgement of the assessment 
 

   
Page 6-32 

 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
team. The rationale used to evaluate the significance of each of the residual environmental effects is 
provided below. Section 6.2.16 provides an assessment of Project-related GHG emissions on human 
health.  

TABLE 6.2.13 
 

CHARACTERIZATION OF RESIDUAL EFFECTS FOR 
EVALUATION OF SIGNIFICANCE - GHG EMISSIONS 

Potential Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
a. Increase in GHG 

emissions during 
construction and 
site-specific maintenance 
activities 

Impact Balance: Negative The Project will contribute to increased GHG emissions. 
Spatial Boundary: 
International 

GHG emissions are considered to be global in nature. 

Duration: Short-Term The events causing increases in GHG emissions (i.e., construction of the pipeline and 
individual maintenance activity events [e.g., aerial overflights, integrity digs, etc.]) are 
limited to the construction phase or are completed within any 1 year during the 
operations phase. 

Frequency: Isolated to periodic The event causing increases in GHG emissions (i.e., construction of the pipeline) is 
confined to a specific period. Maintenance and operations related activities (e.g., aerial 
overflights, integrity digs, etc.) will occur intermittently, however, repeatedly, over the 
assessment period. 

Reversibility: Permanent The effect is considered permanent due to the long atmospheric lifetime of GHGs (> 
100 years) and the associated climate change effects. 

Magnitude: Low  There will be a detectable increase in GHG emissions, but the increase does not 
contribute substantially to provincial or national GHG emission totals. These emissions 
are not subject to existing regulations. 

Probability: High The equipment and vehicles used for construction, site-specific maintenance activities 
and operations (e.g., aerial overflights, integrity digs, etc.) emit GHG emissions. 

Confidence: Moderate Emissions were based on the RWDI Air Quality and GHG Assessment (Appendix 4) 
and dispersion modeling which relied on assumptions from past projects of similar 
nature. However, the assessment of residual GHG emissions effects is based on the 
experience of the assessment team. 

Significance: Not significant  The increase in GHG emissions during construction and site-specific maintenance 
activities is of low magnitude and short-term duration, therefore, considered to be not 
significant.  

b. Increase in GHG 
emissions during 
operation of the 
compressor station and 
pipeline 

Impact Balance: Negative The operations of the proposed compressor station will increase GHG emissions.  
Spatial Boundary: 
International 

GHG emissions are considered to be global in nature. 

Duration: Long-term The event causing the increase in GHG emissions is the operations of the proposed 
compressor station which has an expected operating life of approximately 40 years.  

Frequency: Continuous The event causing increases in GHG emissions (i.e., operation of the proposed 
compressor station and pipeline) will occur continuously over the assessment period. 

Reversibility: Permanent This effect is considered permanent due to the long atmospheric lifetime of GHGs 
(>100 years) and the associated climate change effects. 

Magnitude: Medium  An increase in GHG emissions during operation of the compressor station will be 
detectable, but the increase does not contribute substantially to provincial or national 
GHG emission totals. The Project emissions will be included in total NGTL system 
emissions, which are subject to the Alberta SGER.  

Probability: High The operation of the proposed compressor station will emit GHG emissions. 
Confidence: Moderate Emissions were based on the RWDI Air Quality and GHG Assessment (Appendix 4), 

which relied on assumptions from past projects of similar nature. However, the 
assessment of residual GHG effects is based on the experience of the assessment 
team. 

Significance: Not Significant  The increase in GHG emissions, as a result of the proposed compressor station and 
pipeline operation, is of low magnitude and, therefore, not significant.  

c.  Combined effects on 
GHG emissions 

Impact Balance: Negative The combined effects on GHG will result in increased GHG emissions. 
Spatial Boundary: 
International 

GHG emissions are considered to be global in nature. 

Duration: Long-term Potential combined effects on GHG emissions include GHG emissions during 
operation of the proposed compressor station and pipeline and GHG emissions during 
site-specific maintenance activities will occur over the life of the Project. 

 

 
   

Page 6-33 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.13  Cont’d 

Potential Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
c.  Combined effects on 

GHG emissions (cont’d) 
Frequency: Continuous The potential for combined effects on GHG emissions (i.e., GHG emissions during 

operation of the proposed compressor station and pipeline and GHG emissions during 
site-specific maintenance activities) will occur continuously over the assessment 
period. 

Reversibility: Permanent This effect is considered to be permanent due to the long atmospheric lifetime of 
GHGs  
(> 100 years) and the associated climate change effects. 

Magnitude: Medium Potential combined effects on GHG emissions associated with the Project will be 
detectable, but the increase does not contribute substantially to provincial or national 
GHG emission totals. The Project emissions will be included in total NGTL system 
emissions, which are subject to the Alberta SGER. 

Probability: High Potential effects on GHG emissions associated with the Project are likely to occur in 
combination over the assessment period.  

Confidence: Moderate Emissions were based on the RWDI Air Quality and GHG Assessment (Appendix 4) 
which relied on assumptions from past projects of similar nature. However, the 
assessment of combined residual GHG effects is based on the experience of the 
assessment team. 

Significance: Not Significant Potential combined effects on GHG emissions as a result of the Project are of medium 
magnitude and, therefore, not significant. 

Note: Significant Residual Environmental Effect: A high probability of occurrence of a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot 
be technically or economically mitigated. 

 

Increase in Greenhouse Gas Emissions During Construction and Site-Specific Maintenance 
Activities 
The assessment of GHG emissions for the Project was based on the guidance provided in Incorporating 
Climate Change Considerations in Environmental Assessment: General Guidance for Practitioners (CEA 
Agency 2003).The primary source of GHG emissions during construction of the Project will be from fuel 
combustion while transporting crews to and from the work site and the operation of heavy equipment 
required for construction, as well as from open burning during land clearing activities, where required. Fuel 
combustion from vehicle and equipment use (e.g., for aerial overflights and integrity digs) will be the largest 
source of all GHG emissions during site-specific maintenance activities. The amount of GHG emissions 
associated with construction activities will be reduced by utilizing multi-passenger vehicles for the transport 
of crews to and from job sites to the extent practical, as well as utilizing well-maintained equipment The 
potential for reduction in the effectiveness of carbon sinks and subsequent effect on GHG totals associated 
with clearing of vegetation will be reduced by following existing linear disturbances (i.e., pipelines, access 
roads and seismic lines) for approximately 28 km (77% of the pipeline route) and maintaining 
environmentally responsible and economically efficient timber harvest operation along the proposed Project 
Footprint (Appendix 1), thereby limiting the amount of clearing necessary.  

Total GHG emissions were estimated for the construction of the Project, assuming an approximate nine 
month construction duration (Appendix 4), as assumed during the time when the report was compiled. 
Emission totals for all GHGs contribute negligibly relative to the annual provincial and national emissions 
reported in 2012 (Table 6.2.11). Based on the scope of the Project and anticipated duration of construction 
activities, the GHG emissions during construction and site-specific maintenance activities will be of low 
magnitude and are unlikely to result in a measurable change to national or provincial GHG totals 
(Table 6.2.13, point [a]). 

Increased in GHG Emissions During Operation of the Compressor Station and Pipeline 
Operational GHG emissions will be dominated by the compressor at the proposed Leismer East 
Compressor Station facility. Other substantial GHG emission sources during operations include a boiler as 
well as by venting and fugitive emissions. Emissions of CH4, N2O and CO2 were quantified in the Air Quality 
and GHG Assessment for the Project (Appendix 4). The total CO2 equivalent (CO2e) of these substances 
emitted annually during operations is expected to correspond to approximately 0.04% of the Alberta total 
emissions in 2012 and 0.01% of total national emissions in 2012. The expected GHG emissions during the 
operation of the compressor station  will be included in the overall NGTL system emissions and will not 
 

   
Page 6-34 

 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
trigger additional regulatory requirements. Since residual effects are within the regulatory standards but 
included in NGTL system wide reduction targets for emission intensity, the magnitude is medium 
(Table 6.2.13, point [b]). 

Combined Effects on GHG Emissions 
An evaluation of the combined effects on GHG emissions considers those potential residual effects that are 
likely to occur and, therefore, the combined effects evaluation considers the individual potential residual 
effects evaluated (Table 6.2.13, points [a] and [b]) that are likely to occur and could act in combination. 

The following potential residual effects will to act in combination to result in overall effects on air emissions 
during construction and operations of the Project: 

• an increase in GHG emissions during site-specific maintenance activities; and 

• an increase in GHG emissions from the operation of the proposed compressor station 
and pipeline. 

The combined effects of the Project on GHG emissions are of periodic frequency and of medium magnitude 
(Table 6.2.13, point [c]). 

6.2.5.4 Summary 

As identified in Table 6.2.13, there are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of a 
permanent or long-term residual environmental effect on GHG emissions of high magnitude that cannot be 
technically or economically mitigated. Consequently, it is concluded that the residual environmental effect 
of Project construction and operations on GHG emissions will be not significant. 

6.2.6 Acoustic Environment 

6.2.6.1 Spatial Boundaries 

The spatial boundaries used in the assessment of effects on the acoustic environment included: 

• the Footprint (as defined in Section 1.4); and  

• an Acoustic Environment LSA. 

Based on the remoteness of the area, the Acoustic Environment LSA was established based on the Project 
Footprint (i.e., the area directly disturbed by the Project, including temporary workspace) and is defined as 
1.5 km from the Project Footprint, including the boundary of the proposed compressor station fenceline 
(Figure 1 in Appendix 5). Two existing facilities that lie within the 1.5 km boundary of the Project were 
considered in the spatial boundaries, including one compressor station and one pump station, and therefore 
the Acoustic Environment LSA is a 1.5 km boundary extending from all three facility fencelines (Section 2.2 
of Appendix 5). 

No Acoustic Environment RSA was established for the Project since the effects from nuisance noise are 
not anticipated to extend beyond the Acoustic Environment LSA. 

6.2.6.2 Potential Effects, Mitigation Measures and Potential Residual Effects 

Potential effects associated with construction and operations of the Project on the acoustic environment 
were identified by the assessment team and are listed in Table 6.214. Ambient noise levels in the Acoustic 
Environment LSA are expected to increase during operations of the proposed compressor station. 

In Alberta, energy facility noise emissions are regulated by the AER’s Directive 038: Noise Control (Alberta 
Energy and Resources Conservation Board [ERCB] 2007). A Noise Impact Assessment (Appendix 5) was 
conducted for the Project following the assessment methods and noise monitoring and control requirements 
of Directive 038.  

 
   

Page 6-35 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Local by-laws in respect to the Project location were reviewed when preparing the noise impact assessment 
and include the RM and Wood Buffalo noise bylaw (No. 83/24) and the Lac La Biche bylaw No. 09-021. 

A summary of measures recommended to mitigate the potential effects are also provided in Table 6.2.14. 
Many of these measures are considered industry standard, as provided by ERCB (2007) (currently 
regulated by the AER), and are in accordance with NGTL standards.  

TABLE 6.2.14 
 

POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND RESIDUAL  
EFFECTS OF PROJECT CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS ON THE ACOUSTIC ENVIRONMENT  

Potential Effect Component 
Spatial 

Boundary1 
Key Recommendations/Mitigation Measures 

[EPP Reference]2 Potential Residual Effect(s) 
1. Noise from 

construction 
equipment  

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

LSA • Ensure that noise abatement equipment on machinery is in 
good working order [Section 8.1]. 

• The Contractor will ensure equipment is well-maintained and 
free of fluid leaks [Section 8.1]. 

• Reduce idling of equipment, where possible [Section 8.1]. 

• Increase in nuisance noise 
during Project construction. 

2. Noise during 
operations and 
maintenance 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

LSA • Ensure that noise abatement equipment on machinery is in 
good working order [Section 8.1]. 

• A Noise Impact Assessment was conducted for the Project 
and is provided in Appendix 5. 

• Increase in noise levels 
during operations and 
site-specific maintenance 
activities. 

Notes: 1 LSA = Acoustic Environment LSA. 
 2 Detailed mitigation measures are outlined in the Project-specific EPP (Appendix 1). 
 

6.2.6.3 Significance Evaluation of Potential Residual Effects 

A combination of quantitative and qualitative methods was considered the most appropriate method to 
evaluate the significance of potential residual effects on the acoustic environment, using the quantitative 
data from the Noise Impact Assessment (Appendix 5) and accepted standards, guidelines and regulatory 
thresholds (e.g., Directive 038). Where appropriate, the qualitative assessment relied on available research 
literature and the professional judgement of the assessment team.  

Table 6.2.15 provides a summary of the significance evaluation of potential residual environmental effects 
of the construction and operations of the Project on the acoustic environment. The rationale used to 
evaluate the significance of each of the residual environmental effects is provided in Table 6.2.15. 

TABLE 6.2.15 
 

CHARACTERIZATION OF POTENTIAL RESIDUAL  
EFFECTS FOR EVALUATION OF SIGNIFICANCE – ACOUSTIC ENVIRONMENT 

Potential Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
a. Increase in nuisance 

noise during Project 
construction 

Impact Balance: Negative Noise arising from construction activities will occur along the pipeline route and at the 
proposed compressor station location. 

Spatial Boundary: Acoustic 
Environment LSA 

Noise resulting from construction activities may transmit beyond the construction right-
of-way and facility site. 

Duration: Short-Term The event causing nuisance noise is construction of the Project. 
Frequency: Isolated The event causing nuisance noise (i.e., construction of the Project) is confined to a 

specific period. 
Reversibility: Short-Term The effects associated with nuisance noise will be alleviated when construction is 

completed. 
Magnitude: Low Given the remote location, there is a lack of receptors to hear the nuisance noise. 
Probability: High Heavy machinery and other construction equipment required for Project construction 

will produce noise above baseline conditions while in use. 
Confidence: High Emissions data were based on the RWDI Noise Impact Assessment (Appendix 5), 

however, the assessment of noise emissions is based on the experience of the 
assessment team. 

 
   

Page 6-36 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.15  Cont’d 

Potential Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
a. Increase in nuisance 

noise during Project 
construction (cont’d) 

Significance: Not Significant The increase of nuisance noise during Project construction is of low magnitude and 
reversible in the short-term and, therefore, considered to be not significant.  

b. Increased noise during 
operations and site-
specific maintenance 
activities  

Impact Balance: Negative An increase in noise will occur during operation of the compressor station and along 
the pipeline route during site-specific maintenance. 

Spatial Boundary: Acoustic 
Environment LSA 

Noise resulting from operations of the Project and maintenance activities (e.g., aerial 
patrols, vegetation management and integrity digs) may transmit beyond the 
easements. 

Duration: Immediate to 
Long-Term 

Certain maintenance activities may take less than 2 days (e.g., aerial patrol) while the 
operation of the compressor station will take place for the life of the Project (i.e., 40 
years). 

Frequency: Periodic to 
Continuous 

The event causing nuisance noise (i.e., maintenance activities) occurs intermittently, 
however, repeatedly, over the assessment period while the operation of the proposed 
compressor station will be continuous. 

Reversibility: Immediate to 
Long-term 

Certain maintenance activities may take less than 2 days (e.g., aerial patrol) while 
noise associated with the operation of the compressor station is expected to occur over 
the life of the Project (i.e., 40 years). Noise will stop as soon as the activities stop. 

Magnitude: Low Given the remote location and lack of permanent receptors and given that the Project is 
within the permissible sound levels outlined in Directive 038. 

Probability: High The proposed compressor station and certain equipment (e.g., heavy machinery) which 
may be used during site-specific maintenance activities will produce noise over 
baseline conditions while in use. 

Confidence: High Emissions data were based on the RWDI Noise Impact Assessment (Appendix 5), 
however, the assessment of noise emissions is based on the experience of the 
assessment team. 

Significance: Not Significant  Increased noise during maintenance and operations is reversible in the immediate to 
long-term and of low magnitude and, therefore, considered not significant.  

Note: Significant Residual Environmental Effect: A high probability of occurrence of a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot 
be technically or economically mitigated. 

 

Noise During Construction Activities 
Noise arising from construction activities will occur. However, there are no permanent residences within the 
Acoustic Environment LSA. Construction equipment and vehicles will be operating with noise abatement 
equipment (e.g., mufflers) and construction activities will be carried out during daytime hours (RM of Wood 
Buffalo bylaw 83/24). The residual effect of construction noise is reversible in the short-term and is of low 
magnitude (Table 6.2.15, point [a]). 

Noise During Operations and Maintenance Activities 
Ambient noise levels at the Project site (i.e., the compressor site during operations and the pipeline right-
of-way during maintenance) will increase during operations and maintenance. RWDI used the ERCB 
Directive 038 Noise Control (2007) as the noise impact assessment criteria for the Project (Appendix 5). 
Additionally, a field noise monitoring program was conducted by RWDI in June 2014 as per Directive 038 
requirements in order to measure the existing noise emissions in the Acoustic Environment LSA. Existing 
sources of noise include two industrial facilities and natural sounds (e.g., wildlife and wind). The proposed 
compressor station consists of a single compressor facility housed in a building and therefore sound 
modelling was, in part, derived from known equipment specifications. The Noise Impact Assessment 
consisted of a single scenario with all equipment running at full capacity and found that the predicted 
daytime and nighttime noise levels as a result of the Project meet the permissible sound levels outlined in 
Directive 038 of 50dBA and 40dBA, respectively. Therefore, the likelihood of a low frequency noise concern 
is minimal. Consequently, the residual effect of an increase in nuisance noise during operations and 
maintenance is of low magnitude (Table 6.2.15, point [b]). 

6.2.6.4 Summary 

As identified in Table 6.2.15, there are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of a 
permanent or long-term residual environmental effect on the acoustic environment of high magnitude that 
 

   
Page 6-37 

 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
cannot be technically or economically mitigated. Consequently, it is concluded that the residual 
environmental effects of Project construction and operations on the acoustic environment will be not 
significant. 

6.2.7 Fish and Fish Habitat 

6.2.7.1 Spatial Boundaries 

The spatial boundaries used in the effects assessment of fish and fish habitat considered one or more of 
the following areas: 

• a Footprint Study Area (as defined in Section 1.4); 

• a Fish and Fish Habitat LSA; and 

• an Aquatics RSA.  

The Fish and Fish Habitat LSA (Figure 5.6) is defined as 100 m upstream and a minimum of 300 m 
downstream of the construction right-of-way at all watercourses crossed by the pipeline route. The 
upstream limit of 100 m was selected because the pipeline is unlikely to affect fish and fish habitat upstream 
from where the watercourse crossing activities will occur. The downstream limit of 300 m was selected 
based on the ZOI likely to be affected by direct disturbance and sediment deposition during construction 
and operations. The ZOI is the reach of a watercourse where 90% of the sediment load caused by 
construction activities is expected to fall out of suspension (AENV 2000a,b). There are many variables (e.g., 
stream velocity, discharge rate, turbidity levels) to consider when evaluating distances downstream at which 
impacts of the Project may affect specific fish populations. Dry or frozen to bottom conditions during winter 
will limit the potential for downstream impacts at most crossings.  

The Fish and Fish Habitat LSA also includes the area of riparian vegetation to a width of 30 m back from 
each bank edge within the width of the construction right-of-way. Figure 5.6 provides an example of the 
Fish and Fish Habitat LSA at Dropoff Creek. The proposed Leismer East Compressor Station is not located 
with 30 m of a waterbody that supports fish or fish habitat.  

The Aquatics RSA (Figure 5.2) is defined as a 30 km wide band centred on the proposed pipeline route 
right-of-way centre line (i.e., 15 km on both sides of the construction right-of-way centre line). The RSA also 
includes a 15 km long downstream extension along the Athabasca River and a 2 km upstream extension 
along the House River, from the Athabasca/House River confluence, with a 500 m buffer on both sides of 
each river.  

The spatial boundaries associated with the Aquatics RSA used for the effects assessment for Fish and Fish 
Habitat are described in Section 6.2.3 Water Quality and Quantity. 

6.2.7.2 Ecological Context 

The pipeline route is located in the House River sub-basin within the Athabasca River Basin. Within the 
House River sub-basin, the pipeline route crosses the House River, Dropoff Creek, an unnamed tributary 
of the House River and several unnamed tributaries of Dropoff Creek. Dropoff Creek is a direct tributary of 
the House River. Several fish-bearing and nonfish-bearing drainages are also crossed. Waterbody 
crossings identified in the desktop assessment were assessed during open water conditions in July and 
August 2013, and May 2014. Along the pipeline route, eight watercourse crossings, four fish-bearing 
drainages (i.e., two confirmed fish-bearing drainages and two potential fish-bearing drainages), and six 
nonfish-bearing drainages were confirmed. The eight watercourse crossings include: five unnamed 
tributaries of Dropoff Creek (WC1, WC2, WC3, WC4 and WC5); Dropoff Creek (WC6); an unnamed 
tributary of the House River (WC7); and the House River (WC8).  

The expected fish community in the House River sub-basin is a mix of both coldwater (e.g., salmonids) and 
cool water (e.g., percids and esocids) species. There are no fish species at risk listed by COSEWIC known 
or expected to occur within the House River sub-basin in the vicinity of the pipeline route 
(COSEWIC 2014a). No provincially-listed species or fish species listed as at risk by COSEWIC or SARA 

 
   

Page 6-38 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
were captured or observed at any of the watercourses during the open water aquatic assessments. Fish 
were captured at 7 of the 12 watercourses/fish-bearing drainages crossed by the pipeline route (WC4, 
WC5, WC6, WC7, WC8, FD3, FD4).  

TEK was gathered and recorded with community members of the Christina River Dene Nation Council, 
Saddle Lake First Cree Nation and Willow Lake Métis Local No. 780 during the aquatics field studies for 
this Project throughout 2013 (Appendix 3). 

6.2.7.3 Potential Effects, Mitigation Measures and Potential Residual Effects 

The potential effects on fish and fish habitat associated with the construction and operations of the pipeline 
were identified in consultation with Aboriginal communities and by the assessment team and have been 
incorporated into Table 6.2.16. Participants expressed issues and concerns regarding fish species and 
spawning habitat and general concern regarding spills for which mitigation is included in Table 6.2.16 and 
the EPP (Appendix 1). 

Participants have not recommended any additional mitigation measures related to aquatic resources to be 
implemented for the Project. Additional mitigation measures recommended to reduce the severity of 
potential effects of the Project on fish and fish habitat is provided in the Fish Technical Report (Appendix 3). 
These measures were developed in accordance with several industry and provincial and federal regulatory 
guidelines including CAPP et al. (2012), DFO (1995, 2013, 2014) and AENV (2000a,b). 

  

 
   

Page 6-39 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
TABLE 6.2.16 

 
POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND RESIDUAL EFFECTS 

OF PIPELINE CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS ON FISH AND FISH HABITAT 

Potential Effect Component 
Spatial 

Boundary1 
Key Recommendations/Mitigation Measures 

[EPP Reference]2 
Potential Residual 

Effect(s) 
1. Riparian habitat 

loss and 
alteration during 
construction 

Pipeline (at 
watercourse 
crossings)  

Footprint General 
• Watercourse crossing requirements are provided in Table 2 and in 

Section 8.4 of the EPP, and are indicated on the Environmental 
Alignment Sheets (Appendix 2). 

• Prohibit clearing of extra temporary workspace within 10 m of a 
watercourse to protect riparian areas. This area shall be clearly 
marked prior to clearing operations. The right-of-way will be narrowed 
through the riparian area, if possible [Section 8.4]. 

Vehicle Crossings 
• Construct or install temporary vehicle access across waterbodies, 

shorelines, and riverbanks in a manner that protects the banks from 
erosion and maintains the flows in the waterway and follows the COP 
for Alberta as well as DFO’s Self-Assessment Process (DFO 2014) 
and Measures to Avoid Causing Harm to Fish and Fish Habitat 
(DFO 2013) [Section 8.4]. 

• Remove all temporary vehicle crossing structures prior to spring 
break-up. Remove or breach snow or ice bridges to ensure they do 
not impede flow. Ensure that removal of access does not disturb the 
bed or banks of the crossing [Section 8.8]. 

Clearing and Grading 
• Limit clearing at watercourse crossings to the removal of trees and 

shrubs to the ditch line and work side areas required for vehicle 
crossings [Section 8.4]. 

• Fell trees away from watercourses. Immediately remove trees, debris 
or soil inadvertently deposited below the high watermark of a 
watercourse [Section 8.4]. 

• Delay grading of the primary banks of watercourses until immediately 
before construction of the crossing. If required, appropriate temporary 
erosion and sediment control structures shall be installed, at the 
discretion of the Environmental Inspector(s) upon initial disturbance of 
the vegetative mat and strippings [Section 8.4]. 

• Ensure that grubbing, stripping and grading on approach slopes to 
watercourses is restricted to an amount required to allow the safe 
passage of equipment, excavation of the trench, and installation of the 
pipeline [Section 8.4]. 

Riparian Restoration 
• Install erosion and sediment control at all watercourses and/or 

waterbodies as directed by the Environmental Inspector(s) 
[Section 8.4]. 

• Implement permanent bank reclamation measures to re-establish 
riparian vegetation and fish habitat as a part of backfill operations 
[Section 8.4]. 

• Seed disturbed banks and riparian areas with an approved native 
seed mixture. The Environmental Inspector(s) will determine on-site 
whether other restoration methods need to be applied to stabilize 
banks (e.g., soil wraps, brush layers, and matting) [Section 8.4]. 

• Alteration or loss 
of riparian 
vegetation within 
construction 
rights-of-way and 
temporary 
workspace during 
construction 
activities. 

2. Riparian habitat 
loss and 
alteration during 
maintenance and 
operations 

Pipeline (at 
watercourse 
crossings) 

Footprint • See recommended mitigation measures outlined in potential effect 1 
of this table.  

• Alteration or loss 
of riparian 
vegetation within 
construction 
rights-of-way and 
temporary 
workspace during 
maintenance and 
operations. 

 

 
   

Page 6-40 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.16  Cont’d 

Potential Effect Component 
Spatial 

Boundary1 
Key Recommendations/Mitigation Measures 

[EPP Reference]2 
Potential Residual 

Effect(s) 
3. Instream habitat 

loss and 
alteration 

Pipeline (at 
watercourse 
crossings) 

LSA General 
• Comply with the fisheries protection provisions of the Fisheries Act 

and its supporting Fisheries Protection Policy by applying DFO’s 
Measures to Avoid Causing Harm to Fish and Fish Habitat 
[Section 8.4].  

Vehicle Crossings 
• Construct or install temporary vehicle access across waterbodies, 

shorelines, and riverbanks in a manner that protects the banks from 
erosion and maintains the flows in the waterway and follows the COP 
for Alberta, as well as DFO’s Measures to Avoid Causing Harm to 
Fish and Fish Habitat (DFO 2013) [Section 8.4]. 

• Consider alternate methods of vehicle crossings on a site-specific 
basis. The decision-making process will include the Contractor, 
Construction Manager and the Environmental Inspector(s). Decision 
criteria will include protection of the riparian vegetation and fisheries 
values associated with the crossing, and applicable legislation 
[Section 8.4]. 

Open Cut Crossing Technique  
• Conduct typical open cut of seasonally dry or frozen to the bottom 

watercourses in accordance with DFO Measures to Avoid Causing 
Harm to Fish and Fish Habitat [Section 8.4]. 

• Store excavation material outside the watercourse during the open cut 
[Section 8.4]. 

• Place only imported clean coarse material (gravel or rock) or native 
material removed from the trench as the final 0.5 m of backfill. Any 
imported material must be obtained from a Company approved off-
site location [Section 8.4]. 

Isolation Crossing Technique 
• Before the installation of the water crossing and the commencement 

of instream activity, the Contractor will ensure that all necessary 
equipment and materials are available and are on-site [Section 8.4]. 

• Conduct isolated crossings of watercourses in accordance with DFO’s 
Self-Assessment Process and DFO Measures to Avoid Causing Harm 
to Fish and Fish Habitat [Section 8.4]. 

• Place only imported clean coarse material (gravel or rock) or native 
material removed from the trench as the final 0.5 m of backfill. Any 
imported material must be obtained from a Company approved off-
site location [Section 8.4]. 

• Refer to Appendix 3 for additional site-specific recommended 
mitigation for the contingency pipeline crossing method for the House 
River (WC8C). 

Trenchless Crossing Technique 
• For pipeline crossings conducted using a trenchless crossing method, 

apply DFO’s Self-Assessment Process and DFO Measures to Avoid 
Causing Harm to Fish and Fish Habitat [Section 8.4]. 

• Excavate entry and exit sites back from the ordinary high watermark 
and far enough from the watercourse to provide for containment of 
sediments and other deleterious substances above the high 
watermark [Section 8.4]. 

• Ensure that water from dewatering entry and exit sites with a high 
sediment load is not discharged or allowed to flow into any waterbody. 
Remove the sediment load (e.g., filtered or discharged into a 
vegetated area) before discharge water is allowed to enter any 
watercourse [Section 8.4]. 

• In the event of sediment releases or spills of deleterious substances 
during the construction of the trenchless crossings implement the 
Directional Drilling Procedures and Instream Drilling Mud Release 
Contingency Plan (Appendix 1E) [Section 8.4]. 

• Alteration of 
instream habitat 
within the ZOI at 
trenched 
crossings and 
temporary vehicle 
crossings. 

 
   

Page 6-41 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.16  Cont’d 

Potential Effect Component 
Spatial 

Boundary1 
Key Recommendations/Mitigation Measures 

[EPP Reference]2 
Potential Residual 

Effect(s) 
4. Increased 

suspended 
sediment 
concentrations in 
the water column 

Pipeline (at 
watercourse 
crossings) 

LSA • Seed disturbed banks and riparian areas with an approved native 
seed mixture. The Environmental Inspector(s) will determine on-site 
whether other restoration methods need to be applied to stabilize 
banks (e.g., soil wraps, brush layers, and matting) [Section 8.4]. 

• Develop water quality monitoring plans to monitor for sediment events 
during instream construction activities as required by the applicable 
regulatory approvals (i.e., the DFO’s Self-Assessment Process and 
Measures to Avoid Causing Harm to Fish and Fish Habitat). If 
monitoring reveals sediment values are approaching threshold values, 
the water quality monitors will alert the Environmental Inspector(s) 
and work with them to develop corrective actions. If corrective actions 
are not successful, construction activities will be temporarily 
suspended until effective solutions are identified [Section 8.4]. 

• In the event that beaver dams or lodges will be disturbed, provide 
notification or obtain the necessary provincial permits prior to 
commencing activities. Engage the registered trapper(s) [Section 8.4]. 

• Increase in 
suspended solids 
concentration on 
fish and fish 
habitat during 
instream 
construction at 
trenched 
crossings within 
the ZOI. 

5. Fish mortality or 
injury 

Pipeline (at 
watercourse 
crossings and 
hydrostatic test 
source/release 
locations) 

RSA • If an isolated method is employed, and where recommended by an 
aquatics specialist (i.e., QAES or provincial equivalent), conduct a fish 
salvage led by an aquatics specialist [Section 8.4]. 

• A Fish Research License from AESRD is required for fish salvage 
activities and must be applied for at least 10 working days in advance 
so it is received prior to isolation of the watercourse [Section 8.4].  

• Conduct fish salvage, in accordance with permit conditions, using 
appropriate methods and equipment. Release all captured fish to 
areas downstream of the crossing that provide suitable habitat 
[Section 8.4]. 

• Screen all water intakes in accordance with the Freshwater Intake 
End-of-Pipe Fish Screen Guideline published by DFO. Maintain 
screens so they are clear of debris [Section 8.7]. 

• Increased fish 
mortality or injury 
due to 
construction 
activities. 

6. Combined effects 
on fish species of 
concern 

Pipeline (at 
watercourse 
crossings) 

LSA • Watercourse crossing requirements are provided in Table 2 and in 
Section 8.4 of the EPP, and are indicated on the Environmental 
Alignment Sheets (Appendix 2). 

• Refer to points 1 to 5 of this table for additional mitigation measures. 

• Fish species of 
concern may be 
affected by an 
increase in 
suspended 
sediment 
concentration, 
habitat alteration 
within the ZOI 
and increased 
potential for 
mortality or injury. 

7. Drilling mud 
release on fish 
and fish habitat 

Pipeline (at 
watercourse 
crossings) 

RSA • Develop an emergency response plan that will be implemented in the 
event of sediment releases or spills of deleterious substances during 
the construction of the trenchless crossings [Section 8.4]. 

• In the event of sediment releases or spills of deleterious substances 
during the construction of the trenchless crossings implement the 
Directional Drilling Procedures and Instream Drilling Mud Release 
Contingency Plan (Appendix 1E) [Section 8.4]. 

• Dispose of all waste drilling fluid and drilling solids according to and in 
conformance with pertinent regulatory requirements [Section 8.4]. 

• Refer to point 1 in this table for additional mitigation measures 
regarding riparian habitat loss and alteration during construction. 

• Refer to point 3 in this table for additional mitigation and monitoring 
measures regarding drilling mud releases during construction. 

• An alteration or 
loss of riparian 
habitat function 
due to sediment 
deposition 
resulting from the 
accidental 
release of drilling 
mud. 

• An alteration of 
instream habitat 
function and fish 
mortality or injury 
within the ZOI 
from sediment 
deposition 
resulting from the 
accidental 
release of drilling 
mud. 

 
   

Page 6-42 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.16  Cont’d 

Potential Effect Component 
Spatial 

Boundary1 
Key Recommendations/Mitigation Measures 

[EPP Reference]2 
Potential Residual 

Effect(s) 
8. Increased access 

on fish and fish 
habitat 

Pipeline (at 
watercourse 
crossings) 

LSA • Remove bar ditch ramps and reclaim all temporary access trails and 
shoo-flies to stable conditions. Recontour to preconstruction 
conditions and seed accordingly [Section 8.8]. 

• Remove all temporary vehicle crossing structures prior to spring 
break-up. Remove or breach snow or ice bridges to ensure they do 
not impede flow. Ensure that removal of access does not disturb the 
bed or banks of the crossing [Section 8.8]. 

• Remove all mats and ramps used so that they do not impede the 
restoration of natural drainage patterns [Section 8.8]. 

• Install rollback to prevent access along portions of the right-of-way as 
indicated on the Environmental Alignment Sheets or directed by the 
Environmental Inspector(s) and Construction Manager. Spread evenly 
over right-of-way. Do not walk over access control rollback 
[Section 8.8]. 

• Project personnel are not permitted to hunt or fish on the work site 
[Section 7.1]. 

• Clearly delineate areas that have access restrictions. Restrict access 
to essential construction personnel only. Direct all other personnel to 
the right-of-way via alternate access routes [Section 6.0]. 

• An alteration of 
fish and fish 
habitat and 
increased fish 
mortality or injury 
due to a potential 
increase in 
access during 
operations. 

9. Blockage of fish 
movements 

Pipeline (at 
watercourse 
crossings) 

RSA • Ensure maintenance of downstream flow at all times when 
constructing an isolated crossing [Section 8.4]. 

• If an isolated method is employed, and where recommended by an 
Aquatics Specialist (i.e., QAES or provincial equivalent), conduct a 
fish salvage led by an Aquatics Specialist [Section 8.4]. 

• Conduct fish salvage, in accordance with permit conditions, using 
appropriate methods and equipment. Release all captured fish to 
areas downstream of the crossing that provide suitable habitat 
[Section 8.4]. 

• Install and remove any temporary vehicle crossings in a manner that 
protects the banks from erosion and maintains the flow in the 
waterway. These crossings will be returned to their preconstruction 
condition [Section 8.4]. 

• Temporary 
blockage of fish 
movement during 
isolated 
watercourse 
crossings. 

10.  Interbasin 
transfer of 
aquatic 
organisms 

Pipeline (at 
watercourse 
crossings and 
hydrostatic test 
source/release 
locations). 

RSA • Discharge hydrostatic test water into the same drainage basin from 
which it was withdrawn, unless otherwise approved by the appropriate 
authority [Section 8.7]. 

• Ensure water hauling trucks for test water, if used, are clean and 
inspected prior to use [Section 8.7]. 

• No residual effect 
identified. 

11. Contamination 
from spills during 
construction  

Pipeline (at 
watercourse 
crossings) 

RSA • Do not allow fuel, oil, or hazardous material storage within 100 m of a 
watercourse or waterbody except where secondary containment is 
provided [Section 8.1]. 

• Conduct refuelling at least 100 m away from any watercourse or 
waterbody when feasible [Section 8.1]. 

• Employ the following measures to reduce risk of fuel spills in water. 
Where equipment refuelling is required within 100 m of a watercourse, 
ensure that: 
− all containers, hoses, nozzles are free of leaks;  
− all fuel nozzles are equipped with automatic shut-offs; and  
− always have operators stationed at both ends of the hose during 

fuelling [Section 8.1]. 
• In the event of a spill, refer to the Spill Contingency Plan 

(Appendix 1E) [Section 8.1]. 
• Do not wash equipment or machinery in watercourses or waterbodies 

[Section 8.1]. 
• Equipment to be used in or adjacent to a watercourse or waterbody 

will be clean or otherwise free of external grease, oil or other fluids, 
mud, soil and vegetation, prior to entering the waterbody 
[Section 8.1]. 

• Contamination of 
instream and 
riparian habitat 
from spills during 
construction. 

Notes: 1 LSA = Fish and Fish Habitat LSA; RSA = Aquatics RSA. 
 2 Detailed mitigation measures are outlined in the Project-specific EPP (Appendix 1).  

 
   

Page 6-43 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
6.2.7.4 Significance Evaluation of Potential Residual Effects 

A qualitative assessment was considered the most appropriate method to evaluate the significance of 
potential residual effects on fish and fish habitat, with the evaluation of significance of each of the potential 
residual effects relying on CCME guidelines as well as other federal and provincial guidelines. This 
qualitative assessment relied on available research literature and the professional judgement of the 
assessment team. 

A summary of the significance evaluation of potential residual environmental effects of the construction and 
operations of the pipeline on fish and fish habitat is provided in Table 6.2.17. The rationale used to evaluate 
the significance of each of the residual environmental effects is provided below. All assessment criteria 
were considered when determining the significance of each residual effect, however, the most influential 
assessment criteria were magnitude, reversibility and probability. An evaluation of significance is not 
required for those potential effects where no residual effect is identified (i.e., interbasin transfer of aquatic 
organisms). 

TABLE 6.2.17 
 

CHARACTERIZATION OF POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS  
FOR EVALUATION OF SIGNIFICANCE – FISH AND FISH HABITAT 

Potential Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
a. Alteration or loss of 

riparian vegetation within 
construction rights-of-way 
and temporary 
workspace during 
construction activities 

Impact balance: Negative Riparian vegetation within the construction right-of-way and temporary workspace will 
be disturbed during construction. 

Spatial boundary: Footprint Clearing or disturbance of riparian vegetation is confined to the area of disturbance 
along the construction right-of-way. 

Duration: Short-Term The event causing clearing or disturbance of riparian vegetation is construction of the 
watercourse crossing. 

Frequency: Isolated The event causing clearing or disturbance of riparian vegetation (i.e., construction of 
watercourse crossings) is the construction of the pipeline and is confined to a specific 
period. 

Reversibility: Short to 
Long-Term 

Depending upon the pre-existing vegetation community (e.g., grasses [short-term], 
shrubs [medium-term] or trees [long-term]). 

Magnitude: Low Based on anticipated revegetation plans and associated mitigation measures which 
would reduce the potential effect to a level well within environmental standards. 

Probability: High Clearing or disturbance of riparian vegetation is expected to occur at all trenched (i.e., 
isolated or open cut) watercourse crossings where riparian vegetation exists. 

Confidence: High The assessment is based on a good understanding of cause-effect relationships, 
trenched crossing methods and associated effects on riparian vegetation. 

Significance: Not Significant  The clearing or disturbance of riparian vegetation during construction is of low 
magnitude and reversible in the short to long-term and, therefore, not significant. 

b. Alteration or loss of 
riparian vegetation within 
construction rights-of-way 
and temporary 
workspace during 
maintenance and 
operations 

Impact balance: Negative Riparian vegetation within the construction right-of-way and temporary workspace will 
be disturbed during maintenance and operations. 

Spatial boundary: Footprint Clearing or disturbance of riparian vegetation during pipeline operation is confined to 
watercourse crossings requiring maintenance along the pipeline right-of-way. 

Duration: Immediate to 
Short-Term 

The event causing clearing or disturbance of riparian vegetation is maintenance 
activities (e.g., vegetation management), which may take less than or equal to two days 
or will be completed within one year during the operations phase. 

Frequency: Occasional Any maintenance activities required at watercourse crossings will occur intermittently 
and sporadically over the assessment period. 

Reversibility: Short to 
Long-Term 

Depending on the pre-existing vegetation community (e.g., grasses [short-term], shrubs 
[medium-term] or trees [long-term]) and extent of clearing or disturbance of riparian 
vegetation required for maintenance activities to take place. 

Magnitude: Low The implementation of the proposed mitigation measures is expected to effectively 
reduce the effects on riparian vegetation. 

Probability: Low Clearing within the riparian area is not expected to occur during operations. 
Confidence: High The assessment is based on a good understanding of cause-effect relationships, 

trenched crossing methods and associated effects on riparian vegetation. 
 

 
   

Page 6-44 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.17  Cont’d 

Potential Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
b. Alteration or loss of 

riparian vegetation within 
construction rights-of-way 
and temporary workspace 
during maintenance and 
operations (cont’d) 

Significance: Not Significant  The clearing or disturbance of riparian vegetation during maintenance and operations is of 
low magnitude and reversible in the short to long-term and, therefore, not significant. 

c. Alteration of instream 
habitat within the ZOI at 
trenched crossings and 
temporary vehicle 
crossings 

Impact balance: Negative Instream habitat within the construction right-of-way will be disturbed. 
Spatial boundary: Fish and 
Fish Habitat LSA 

The alteration of instream habitat may be confined to the construction right-of-way or 
beyond as a result of downstream sediment deposition. 

Duration: Immediate to 
Short-Term 

The event causing alteration of instream habitat is construction of the pipeline. 

Frequency: Isolated The event causing alteration of instream habitat (i.e., construction of the pipeline) is 
confined to a specific period. 

Reversibility: Short-Term Any sediments that result in deposition on the substrate are expected to be flushed from 
the system following the first annual flushing event following construction. 

Magnitude: Low  Based on the effectiveness of the proposed mitigation measures and the anticipated level 
of effects of the alteration of instream habitat. 

Probability: High Some watercourses with documented fish presence will be crossed using trenched 
(i.e., isolated or open cut) crossing methods. 

Confidence: High The assessment is based on a good understanding of cause-effect relationships, 
trenched crossing methods and associated effects on instream habitat. 

Significance: Not Significant  The alteration of instream habitat is of low magnitude and reversible in the short-term and, 
therefore, considered not significant.  

d. Increase in suspended 
solids concentration on 
fish and fish habitat 
during instream 
construction at trenched 
crossings within the ZOI 

Impact balance: Negative Suspended sediment released at trenched crossings during instream activities can cause 
downstream sediment deposition that alters substrate composition and modifies 
availability and suitability of habitat for spawning, overwintering and rearing. 

Spatial boundary: Fish and 
Fish Habitat LSA 

Suspended solids released during construction activities will be carried downstream until 
they disperse and/or naturally settle out in the ZOI. 

Duration: Short-Term The event causing the release of suspended solids into surface water is construction of 
the pipeline. 

Frequency: Isolated The event causing the release of suspended solids into surface water (i.e., construction of 
the pipeline) is confined to a specific period. 

Reversibility: Immediate to 
Short-Term 

Any sediments that result in deposition on the substrate are expected to be flushed from 
the system following the first annual flushing event following construction. 

Magnitude: Low to Medium The levels of suspended sediments resulting from construction are expected to be within 
CCME standards given the size of the watercourses and flow at the time of construction 
and construction is not occurring during periods when spawning is occurring or sensitive 
life stages are present. 

Probability: High The pipeline route crosses watercourses for which an isolated crossing is recommended if 
the water is present at the time of construction. 

Confidence: High The assessment is based on a good understanding of cause-effect relationships, scientific 
literature and the experience of the assessment team. 

Significance: Not Significant  The increase in suspended solids during instream construction is of low to medium 
magnitude and reversible in the immediate to short-term and, therefore, not significant. 

e. Increased fish mortality or 
injury due to construction 
activities 

Impact balance: Negative Construction activities and fish salvage from isolated areas prior to construction may 
contribute to fish injury or stress and result in fish mortality. 

Spatial boundary: Fish and 
Fish Habitat LSA 

Fish mortality or injury may result from construction activities and fish salvage at 
watercourse crossing locations. 

Duration: Short-Term The event causing fish mortality or injury is instream construction activities. 
Frequency: Isolated The event causing fish mortality or injury (i.e., construction of the watercourse crossing) is 

confined to a specific period. 
Reversibility: Short-Term Loss of one or more individuals is reflected at population scale for at least one year or 

until those individuals can be replaced. 
Magnitude: Low to Medium Based on the successful implementation of the proposed mitigation.  
Probability: Low Mitigation measures will be implemented to prevent fish mortality or injury. 
Confidence: High The assessment is based on a good understanding of cause-effect relationships, scientific 

literature and the experience of the assessment team. 

 
   

Page 6-45 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.17  Cont’d 

Potential Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
e. Increased fish mortality or 

injury due to construction 
activities (cont’d) 

Significance: Not Significant  The potential for increased fish mortality or injury is considered to be of low to medium 
magnitude, low probability and reversible in the short-term and, therefore, not significant.  

f. Potential fish species of 
concern may be affected 
by an increase in 
suspended sediment 
concentration, habitat 
alteration within the ZOI 
and increased potential 
for mortality or injury 

Impact balance: Negative Vehicle and pipeline crossing methods may affect potential species of concern.  
Spatial boundary: Fish and 
Fish Habitat LSA 

Potential fish species of concern may be affected by an increase in suspended sediment 
concentrations downstream of watercourse crossings or habitat alteration from trenched 
(e.g., isolated or open cut) crossing methods. 

Duration: Short-Term The event causing potential fish species of concern to be affected is construction of the 
pipeline. 

Frequency: Isolated The event causing potential fish species of concern to be affected (i.e., construction of the 
pipeline) is confined to a specific period. 

Reversibility: Short to 
Medium-Term 

The residual effects of pipeline construction on potential fish species of concern are 
limited to the construction phase and a short time thereafter, until habitat conditions are 
restored to their natural state. 

Magnitude: Low  Based on the implementation of mitigation measures to effectively reduce the severity of 
effects. 

Probability: Low Based on a proposed winter construction schedule where all of the fish species of 
concern are spring/summer spawners with the exception of lake whitefish and mountain 
whitefish, of which mountain whitefish have only been recently documented in one 
watercourse near the Project area. 

Confidence: High The assessment is based on scientific literature, data specific to watercourses crossed by 
the pipeline route and the experience of the assessment team. 

Significance: Not significant  The probability of fish species of concern being affected during construction activities is 
considered low and, therefore, not significant.  

g. Alteration or loss of 
riparian habitat function 
due to sediment 
deposition resulting from 
the accidental release of 
drilling mud 

Impact Balance: Negative Riparian vegetation within the right-of-way will be disturbed by deposition of fine sediment 
from drilling mud and by clean-up and recovery efforts. 

Spatial Boundary: Aquatics 
RSA 

Drilling mud released on land may flow beyond the construction right-of-way and the 
riparian component of the Fish and Fish Habitat LSA. 

Duration: Immediate The event is the release of drilling mud, the period of which is less than or equal to 
two days. 

Frequency: Accidental The release of drilling mud occurs rarely over the assessment period.  
Reversibility: Short to 
Medium-Term 

Depending upon the length of time it takes for vegetation to recolonize the area disturbed 
by the mud.  

Magnitude: Low to Medium Depending upon the location of the release, the sensitivity of the habitat and quantity of 
drilling mud released.  

Probability: Low Mitigation measures will be implemented during HDD operations to prevent drilling mud 
release.  

Confidence: High Based on the experience of the assessment team and successful implementation of the 
HDD method for previous NGTL projects. 

Significance: Not Significant This potential residual effect is reversible in the short to medium-term, of low to medium 
magnitude and of low probability and, therefore, considered not significant. 

h. Alteration of instream 
habitat function and fish 
mortality or injury within 
the ZOI from sediment 
deposition resulting from 
the accidental release of 
drilling mud 

Impact Balance: Negative A release of drilling mud into a watercourse could affect instream habitat function and fish 
mortality or injury by increasing suspended sediments and sediment deposition.  

Spatial Boundary: Aquatics  Drilling mud released into surface water may be carried downstream and is expected to  
settle out within the ZOI but may extend beyond the Fish and Fish Habitat LSA. 

Duration: Immediate The event causing deposition of drilling mud to instream habitat and fish mortality or injury 
is the release of drilling mud, the period of which is less than or equal to two days.  

Frequency: Accidental The release of drilling mud occurs rarely over the assessment period. 
Reversibility: Immediate to 
Medium-Term 

Depending upon the volume of a release and flow rates of the watercourse. 

Magnitude: Low to High Depending upon the location of the release and sensitivity of the receiving watercourse, 
as well as the quantity of drilling mud released. 

Probability: Low Mitigation measures will be implemented during HDD operations to prevent drilling mud 
release. 

Confidence: High Based on the experience of the assessment team and successful implementation of the 
HDD method for previous NGTL projects. 

Significance: Not Significant This potential residual effect is reversible in the immediate to medium-term, of low to high 
magnitude and of low probability and, therefore, considered not significant. 

 
   

Page 6-46 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.17  Cont’d 

Potential Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
i. An alteration of fish and 

fish habitat and increased 
fish mortality or injury due 
to a potential increase in 
access  

Impact balance: Negative Increased access may cause disturbance of instream fish habitat (e.g., through the use of 
off-road vehicles and fishing equipment). 

Spatial boundary: Fish and 
Fish Habitat LSA 

The pipeline right-of-way may provide increased access to the Fish and Fish Habitat LSA. 

Duration: Long-Term The event causing disturbance to instream habitat is initiated during the construction of 
the right-of-way and is expected to extend beyond the first year of operations.  

Frequency: Isolated The event contributing to increase in access is confined to the construction or operations 
phases. 

Reversibility: Short-Term Effects to instream habitat are expected to be reversed within one year. Loss of one or 
more individuals is reflected at populations scale for at least one year, or until those 
individuals can be replaced.  

Magnitude: Low Due to the presence of existing adjacent rights-of-way, utilization of existing access during 
operations and the implementation of mitigation measures which are expected to 
effectively reduce the effects of increased disturbance of fish habitat.  

Probability: Low Conditions within the Fish and Fish Habitat LSA (e.g., remote setting with wetlands and 
gentle to strong slopes) limit opportunities for recreational off-road vehicle use.  

Confidence: High Based on a good understanding of the assessment team and effectiveness of the 
recommended mitigation measures.  

Significance: Not Significant  This potential residual effect is reversible in the short-term, is of low magnitude and low 
probability, and is therefore, not significant.  

j. Temporary blockage of 
fish movement during 
isolated watercourse 
crossings 

Impact balance: Negative The ability of fish species to migrate upstream or downstream of the crossing may be 
affected. 

Spatial boundary: Aquatics 
RSA 

Blockage of fish movements may extend immediately upstream and downstream of the 
construction right-of-way during instream construction and temporary vehicle access, and 
may affect fish migrations beyond the Fish and Fish Habitat LSA. 

Duration: Immediate to 
Short-Term 

The event causing blockage of fish movements is instream construction. 

Frequency: Isolated The event causing blockage of fish movements (i.e., construction of the watercourse 
crossing) is confined to a specific period. 

Reversibility: Immediate to 
Short-Term 

Any blockage due to watercourse construction would be removed upon completion of 
construction activities. 

Magnitude: Low The implementation of the proposed mitigation measures is expected to effectively reduce 
blockage of fish movements. 

Probability: High The pipeline route crosses watercourses for which an isolated crossing is recommended if 
the water is present at the time of construction. 

Confidence: High The assessment is based on a good understanding by the assessment team of trenched 
crossing methods. 

Significance: Not Significant  The temporary blockage of fish movement during construction is of low magnitude and 
reversible in the immediate to short-term and, therefore, considered not significant.  

k. Contamination of 
instream and riparian 
habitat from spills during 
construction 

Impact balance: Negative A spill may contaminate the instream and riparian habitat. 
Spatial boundary: Aquatics 
RSA 

Depending on the flow conditions of the contaminated water body, the effects of a spill 
could extend into the Aquatics RSA, although most spills are small and more localized. 

Duration: Immediate The event causing a decrease in surface water quality which may affect fish and fish 
habitat is a spill, the period of which is less than or equal to two days. 

Frequency: Accidental Contamination from spills of instream and riparian habitat occurs rarely over the 
assessment period. 

Reversibility: Short to 
Medium-Term 

Depending upon the severity and volume of the spill as well as the level of sensitivity of a 
particular watercourse to adverse residual effects resulting from contamination. 

Magnitude: Low to High  The assessment is based on the sensitivity of the receiving environment or fish species, 
and volume of spill. 

Probability: Low Spills resulting during construction occur rarely in instream and riparian habitat. 
Confidence: High Based on available scientific research literature, results of mitigation measures and post-

construction monitoring programs of past pipeline projects and the professional 
experience of the assessment team. 

Significance: Not Significant  Since the contamination of instream and riparian habitat is considered to be reversible in 
the short to medium-term with low probability, the residual effect is considered not 
significant.  

 
   

Page 6-47 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.17  Cont’d 

Potential Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
l. Combined effects on fish 

and fish habitat  
Impact balance: Negative The combined effects of the individual potential residual effects could act in combination 

on fish and fish habitat. 
Spatial boundary: Aquatics 
RSA 

Alteration or loss of riparian vegetation during construction, alteration of instream habitat, 
an increase in suspended solids and temporary fish blockage may act in combination 
beyond the area of disturbance along the construction right-of-way and Aquatics RSA. 

Duration: Short-Term The event causing combined effects on fish and fish habitat is watercourse construction of 
watercourse and vehicle crossings. 

Frequency: Isolated The event causing combined effects on fish and fish habitat is confined to a specific 
period. 

Reversibility: Medium to 
Long-Term 

Depending upon the pre-existing vegetation community (e.g., shrubs regenerate within 
several years [medium-term]; however, tree regrowth is expected to extend into the 
long-term). 

Magnitude: Low to Medium Combined effects on fish and fish habitat are anticipated to be largely mitigated during 
construction. 

Probability: High All four residual effects identified as having potential to act in combination have a high 
probability of occurring, and since trenched crossing methods are planned for most 
waterbodies along the pipeline route. 

Confidence: High The assessment is based on scientific literature, data specific to watercourses crossed by 
the pipeline route and the experience of the assessment team. 

Significance: Not Significant  Although the probability of combined effects is high, they are of low to medium magnitude 
and reversible in the medium to long-term and, therefore, not significant. 

Note: Significant Residual Environmental Effect: A high probability of occurrence of a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot 
be technically or economically mitigated. 

 

Alteration or Loss of Riparian Vegetation  
Riparian vegetation within the proposed right-of-way and temporary workspace will be disturbed at all 
watercourse crossings. During construction, disturbance to riparian vegetation will be kept to a minimum 
leaving as much existing vegetation intact as practical and efforts to control erosion and sedimentation in 
disturbed areas will be implemented. Disturbance to riparian vegetation will also be reduced during frozen 
ground conditions. Disturbed riparian areas will be seeded post-construction with the appropriate native 
seed mix formulated with species that germinate and establish quickly. This will help stabilize the surface 
organic layer as well as minimize competition for naturally generating plant species. The residual effect of 
pipeline construction on clearing riparian vegetation is considered to be reversible in the short to long-term 
and of low magnitude, depending on the pre-existing vegetation community (e.g., grasses will re-establish 
in the short-term, shrubs regenerate within several years, however, tree canopy regrowth is expected to 
extend into the long-term) (Table 6.2.17, point [a]).  

Routine vegetation control along the proposed right-of-way during maintenance and operations will exclude 
riparian areas. However, a situation may occur during the life of the pipeline where riparian vegetation 
disturbance may be necessary to accommodate maintenance activities (e.g., in the event of a flood event 
that causes scouring over the pipeline trench that would require measures to restore depth of cover and 
pipe integrity). The residual effect of clearing riparian vegetation during pipeline maintenance and 
operations is of low magnitude and reversible in the short to long-term (Table 6.2.17, point [b]).  

Alteration of Instream Habitat  
NGTL is proposing to use isolated (if water is present at the time of construction) or open cut (if dry or 
frozen) trenched crossing techniques for seven of the watercourse crossings, four fish-bearing drainages 
and as a proposed contingency method for the House River (WC8C) (Appendix 3), and has taken into 
consideration the sensitivity of the watercourses including habitat characteristics, fish species present and 
RAPs. NGTL will also implement technical and economically feasible mitigation measures at each crossing. 
Introduction of fine sediment to watercourses from instream activities, runoff from the construction 
right-of-way and erosion can have sub-lethal (e.g., irritation of gill tissue) and lethal (e.g., suffocation of 
developing embryos) effects on fish. Fine sediments also cause downstream sediment deposition that alters 
substrate composition and modifies the availability and suitability of habitat for spawning, overwintering and 

 
   

Page 6-48 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
rearing (Anderson et al. 1996, Newcombe and MacDonald 1991). Effects associated with fine sediments in 
the water column are addressed in the following subsection. 

The proposed watercourse crossing methods for seven of the potential watercourse crossings and the four 
unnamed drainages are included under the DFO Self-Assessment Process and Measures to Avoid Causing 
Harm to Fish and Fish Habitat (DFO 2013, 2014). Watercourse crossings, temporary vehicle crossings and 
dewatering/pumping associated with the proposed crossings are considered low risk activities which do not 
require regulatory review when implemented with mitigation as described by the Measures to Avoid Causing 
Harm to Fish and Fish Habitat (DFO 2013) and the EPP (Appendix 1) as summarized in Table 6.2.16. 
However, material changes to proposed crossing methods or timing that is likely to result in adverse effects 
to fish and fish habitat would be subject to a risk-based re-evaluation by a QAES. An Authorization under 
the Fisheries Act may be required if serious harm to fish and fish habitat that supports a commercial, 
recreational or aboriginal fishery cannot be avoided; however, by implementing mitigation measures as 
described, potential adverse residual effects will be fully mitigated and serious harm avoided.  

Consequently, all of the proposed watercourses and fish-bearing drainages meet the DFO Self-Assessment 
Process to avoid causing serious harm to fish and fish habitat if all QAES recommendations and mitigation 
measures are successfully implemented, resulting in residual effects expected to be of low magnitude and 
reversible in the short-term (Table 6.2.17, point [c]).  

Increased Suspended Solids and Sediment Deposition on Fish and Fish Habitat 
An evaluation of increased suspended solids concentrations and sediment deposition during instream 
construction is provided in Section 6.2.3 Water Quality and Quantity. Through the selection of appropriate 
watercourse crossing techniques, vehicle crossing methods and the successful implementation of erosion 
controls on approaches to watercourse crossings and riparian area revegetation as outlined in Table 6.2.16, 
the potential for adverse effects on aquatic systems along the pipeline route due to suspended solids in the 
water column and sediment deposition is reduced. 

Turbidity levels and suspended sediment concentrations will be monitored, where warranted, during 
instream activities at isolated crossings with sportfish and/or listed fish species habitat potential to confirm 
that TSS concentrations remain below the CCME standard of 25 mg/L above baseline (CCME 2002, 2007). 
This is the level, based on 24 hours of exposure, when mortalities of the most sensitive life history stage 
begin to occur (Newcombe 1994). DFO (2000) has further identified risk levels to protect aquatic resources. 
The risk levels are determined based on the relationship between increasing suspended sediment 
concentrations and the level of risk that increasing sediment concentrations can have on fish and fish 
habitat. DFO (2000) indicates that concentrations < 25 mg/L, 25-100 mg/L, 100-200 mg/L, 200-400 mg/L 
and > 400 mg/L have very low, low, moderate, high and unacceptable risks, respectively. Additional 
background on these risk levels is discussed in Birtwell (1999). AENV’s (1999) guideline of 10 mg/L TSS is 
based on chronic or long-term, exposure to elevated suspended solids. 

The residual effects of increased suspended solids concentrations on fish and fish habitat are considered 
reversible in the immediate to short-term and of low to medium magnitude depending on the extent and 
duration of sediment release (Table 6.2.17, point [d]). With the successful implementation of the 
recommended mitigation measures, the residual effect of increased suspended solids concentrations on 
fish and fish habitat is considered to be not significant.  

Fish Mortality or Injury  
Suspended sediment released at watercourses with fish habitat potential during instream activities could 
cause behavioural or sub-lethal/lethal effects on fish within the ZOI. As indicated above, turbidity levels and 
suspended sediment concentrations will be monitored, where warranted, at these crossings to confirm that 
concentrations remain below the CCME standard of 25 mg/L above baseline (CCME 2002, 2007). This is 
the level at which mortality of the most sensitive life history stage has been reported (Newcombe 1994).  

Trenched crossings (i.e., isolated or open cut) are planned for all watercourse crossings along the pipeline 
route, with the exception of the House River (WC8P) (i.e., primary trenchless option). Fish salvage 
operations, under the direction of a QAES, will be conducted during all isolated crossings of fish-bearing 
waterbodies (see Appendix 3). Fish will be captured prior to dewatering and removed to suitable habitat 

 
   

Page 6-49 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
downstream of the crossing location. It is recommended that a water quality monitoring plan be developed 
and implemented for WC8P (e.g., monitoring for loss of drilling fluids) to ensure that if a drilling loss occurs, 
it can be detected as quickly as possible to implement the Frac-Out Response Plan. A comprehensive 
water quality monitoring plan is recommended for WC8C to ensure turbidity levels are within CCME 
guidelines (CCME 2002, 2007) during instream construction. Visual water quality monitoring is 
recommended for the remaining watercourses and fish-bearing drainages (WC1, WC2, WC3, WC4, WC5, 
WC6, WC7, FD1, FD2, FD3, FD4). 

With the successful implementation of the recommended mitigation measures the residual effect of fish 
mortality or injury is considered to be of low probability and reversible in the short-term 
(Table 6.2.17, point [e]).  

Fish Species of Concern  
Within the House River sub-basin, the fish communities are mixed assemblages containing both coldwater 
(e.g., salmonids) and cool water (e.g., percids and esocids) species. No fish species at risk listed by 
COSEWIC or SARA are known to occur within the House River sub-basin in the vicinity of the pipeline route 
(COSEWIC 2014a).  

Although Alberta considers northern pike and walleye to be Secure (ASRD 2010), both species have 
experienced severe population declines throughout most of their range, therefore, Alberta has implemented 
management and recovery plans (Berry 1995, 1999). Population declines associated with angler 
overharvest and habitat degradation are cited in these management plans as key factors that have led to 
the decline of these species.  

Arctic grayling are listed as Sensitive in Alberta (ASRD 2010) and occur throughout portions of the 
Athabasca, Hay, and Peace River basins (Nelson and Paetz 1992). Arctic grayling populations in Alberta 
are high priority candidates for a detailed status assessment by COSEWIC (COSEWIC 2014c). Alberta has 
implemented a management and recovery plan for Arctic grayling (Berry 1998). Population declines, 
particularly in the southern portions of their range in Alberta, are often attributed to pollution, habitat 
degradation, fragmentation, increasing water temperatures and overharvest by anglers (ASRD 2005, 
Berry 1998). Additional information about Arctic grayling distribution and habitat requirements is provided 
in Appendix 3. 

Northern pikeminnow are listed as Sensitive (ASRD 2010) in Alberta and occur within the Peace River 
drainage system (Nelson and Paetz 1992). The presence of northern pikeminnow during the proposed 
construction activities is not likely at any of the proposed watercourse crossings. Additional information 
about northern pikeminnow distribution and habitat requirements is provided in Appendix 3. 

Northern redbelly dace are listed as Sensitive in Alberta (ASRD 2010) and occur throughout portions of the 
Athabasca, Hay, Peace, North and South Saskatchewan, Oldman and Milk River basins (Nelson and 
Paetz 1992). There is no management plan for northern redbelly dace populations in Alberta. Additional 
information about Northern redbelly dace distribution and habitat requirements is provided in Appendix 3. 

Spoonhead sculpin are found throughout the Slave, Peace, Athabasca and North Saskatchewan River 
basins. They are listed in Alberta as May be at Risk since existing data on the status of populations across 
the province is currently insufficient to designate the species as Secure (Clayton pers. comm.) Spoonhead 
sculpin populations in Alberta are mid priority candidates for a detailed status assessment by COSEWIC 
(COSEWIC 2014c). Since spoonhead sculpin are bottom-feeders and often occur in large rivers, they are 
difficult to capture and study, therefore, basic inventory information on spoonhead sculpin population trends 
in Alberta is lacking. There is no management plan for spoonhead sculpin populations in Alberta. Additional 
information about spoonhead sculpin distribution and habitat requirements is provided in Appendix 3. 

Vehicle and pipeline crossing methods have been selected to reduce Project-specific effects in 
consideration of presence and use by fish species of concern. The pipeline crossing methods for all 
proposed fish-bearing watercourses and drainages are trenched isolated pipeline methods (i.e., if water is 
present) or open cut crossings (i.e., if dry or frozen to bottom), with the exception of the House River (WC8P) 
(i.e., primary trenchless option) (as listed in Table 5 of the Fish Technical Report [Appendix 3]).  

 
   

Page 6-50 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Potential effects on fish species of concern and their habitat are expected to be avoided or reduced by the 
mitigation and reclamation measures summarized in Table 6.2.16. As a result, the residual effects on fish 
species of concern are of low probability and low magnitude (Table 6.2.17, point [f]).  

Potential Effects as a Result of Accidental Drilling Mud Release  
During HDD crossings, monitoring of drilling fluid volumes and pressure, as well as monitoring of sediment 
concentrations in the watercourse and monitoring for on-land frac-outs are expected to reduce the potential 
for a drilling mud release to affect a watercourse. If a release on-land (i.e., terrestrial) were to occur, the 
inert nature of the bentonite clay used would not contaminate the riparian area. However, clean-up and 
reclamation measures are likely to result in some riparian habitat disturbance. With the implementation of 
mitigation and reclamation measures, the residual effects of a drilling mud release on riparian habitat are 
low to medium in magnitude (depending on the size of the release and area affected) and reversible in the 
short to medium-term (also see Section 6.2.20 Accidents and Malfunctions). Efforts to quickly contain a 
terrestrial release would also be used to reduce the potential for the release to affect aquatic habitat 
(Table 6.2.17, point [g]). 

A release of drilling mud into a watercourse could affect instream habitat by increasing suspended 
sediments and sediment deposition. Increased sediment in the water column can increase the probability 
of fish mortality, however, with the implementation of the Directional Drilling Procedures and Instream 
Drilling Mud Release Contingency Plan, the residual effects of a drilling mud release on instream habitat 
and fish mortality or injury are considered to be of low to high magnitude, but of low probability (Table 6.2.17, 
point [h]). Section 6.2.20 includes a discussion of residual effects related to an instream drilling mud release 
and fish mortality or injury, which are considered reversible in the immediate to medium-term, depending 
on the volume of the release and flow rates of the watercourse.  

Potential Effects of Increased Access During Operations 
Increased access has the potential to alter fish and fish habitat and this residual effect is considered to have 
a negative impact balance. One new permanent access road is required to support construction and 
operations of the proposed Leismer East Compressor Station. However, it is noted that 77% of the pipeline 
route will parallel existing linear infrastructure (i.e., pipelines, access roads and seismic lines) and, 
consequently, the concern is limited to off-road vehicle use and legal and illegal fishing activities due to 
pipeline development and operations.  

Increased off-road vehicle access (e.g., recreational vehicles), as a result of pipeline development, could 
result in disturbances to instream habitat during the operations phase of the pipeline and could potentially 
lead to fish mortality (e.g., legal and illegal harvest of fish by anglers).  

With the successful implementation of mitigation measures outlined in the EPP, the residual effect of 
increased access opportunities to disturb instream fish habitat and increase fish mortality or injury will be 
reduced to a low level of magnitude (Table 6.2.17, point [i]).  

Blockage of Fish Movements  
As a result of construction activities, localized blockage of fish movements may occur during instream 
construction activities. The impact balance of this potential residual effect is considered negative since it 
could affect the ability of fish species to migrate upstream or downstream of the crossings during spawning 
or feeding migrations. Fish salvage operations will be conducted at fish-bearing waterbodies (see 
Appendix 3) during isolated-trenched methods where recommended by an aquatics specialist and captured 
fish will be released to areas downstream of the proposed watercourse crossing that provides suitable 
habitat. Fish salvage operations and the industry-accepted mitigation measures outlined in Table 6.2.16 
and the EPP will reduce the potential for blockage of fish movements by instream construction and 
temporary vehicle access. 

Permanent crossings for vehicles can create barriers to fish passage and contribute to habitat fragmentation 
for fish communities (Harper and Quigley 2000, Park et al. 2008, Scrimgeour et al. 2003). However, no new 
permanent vehicle crossings are associated with the pipeline construction, and therefore, the pipeline is 
not expected to contribute to habitat fragmentation for fish communities within the Aquatics RSA. The 

 
   

Page 6-51 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
residual effect of the construction of the pipeline on blockage of fish movements is considered to be 
reversible in the immediate to short-term and of low magnitude (Table 6.2.17, point [j]).  

Contamination from Spills During Construction  
Most spills are small and localized, however, if a large spill, such as a fuel truck rollover in a stream were 
to occur, the adverse residual effects could, depending on the size of the spill, be of low to high magnitude 
with potentially long-lasting ramifications to the health of the watercourse. Although spill contingency and 
clean-up measures would reduce the magnitude and increase the reversibility of the residual effects, such 
an incident could be considered of high magnitude and result in a significant residual effect if it were to 
occur in a highly sensitive environment (Section 6.2.20 Accidents and Malfunctions). Since events such as 
this rarely occur within the proposed construction rights-of-way and occur even more rarely instream, the 
probability of a significant adverse residual effect is low (Table 6.2.16, point [k]).  

Combined Effects on Fish and Fish Habitat  
An evaluation of the combined effects considers those residual effects that are likely to occur and, therefore, 
residual effects [b], [e] through [g] and [k] in Table 6.2.17 are not considered in the evaluation of combined 
effects on fish and fish habitat since the probability of these effects occurring is low. Consequently, the 
combined effects evaluation considers the individual potential residual effects evaluated (points [a], [c], [d] 
and [h] of Table 6.2.17) that are likely to occur, and could act in combination on fish and fish habitat. 

The following potential residual effects are likely to act in combination to result in overall effects on fish and 
fish habitat during a trenched crossing: 

• alteration or loss of riparian vegetation within construction rights-of-way and temporary 
workspace during construction activities;  

• alteration of instream habitat within the ZOI at trenched crossings and temporary vehicle 
crossings;  

• increase in suspended solids concentration on fish and fish habitat during instream 
construction at trenched crossings within the ZOI; and  

• temporary blockage of fish movement during isolated watercourse crossings. 

Trenched isolated crossings are planned for seven watercourses and four fish-bearing drainages and can 
be constructed under the DFO Self-Assessment Process and Measures to Avoid Causing Harm to Fish 
and Fish Habitat if suitable mitigation measures are successfully implemented. The construction of the 
proposed watercourse crossings are planned to occur outside the RAP. The crossing methods, as planned, 
are not expected to require authorization, however, should any changes to the planned construction 
methods or timing occur to any of these watercourses, a review by DFO may be required if there is a 
potential to cause serious harm to fish. If an instream crossing is deemed by DFO to cause serious harm 
to fish that are a part of or support a fishery then an authorization under Section 35(2)(b) of the Fisheries 
Act will be required. If the NEB agrees with the QAES recommendations, and they determine that there are 
no concerns with the construction methods that cannot be mitigated, it is expected that construction of the 
proposed watercourse crossings along the pipeline route should be able to proceed without requiring review 
from DFO. It is expected that the construction of the crossings will adhere to all applicable mitigation 
measures reviewed by a QAES, listed in DFO’s Measures to Avoid Causing Harm to Fish and Fish Habitat 
(DFO 2013) which are deemed sufficient to prevent serious harm to fish as well as maintain the productive 
capacity of the watercourse during and after construction of the Project. 

A trenchless crossing method is recommended for the House River crossing (WC8P) as it is has known 
Arctic grayling presence and contains potentially important and essential habitat conditions for this species. 
A trenchless method would reduce the amount of riparian vegetation clearing and ground disturbance, 
thereby reducing the risk of slope failures of the steep and high, moderately stable banks, which were 
observed in the vicinity of the proposed crossing location. A trenchless crossing method at the House River 
would also prevent river bed disturbance, increased suspended sediment generation and temporary fish 
blockage. The trenchless crossing will need to be constructed in a manner that adheres to all of the 

 
   

Page 6-52 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
conditions and measures in DFO’s Measures to Avoid Causing Harm to Fish and Fish Habitat (DFO 2013) 
as well as the mitigation measures outlined in the EPP (Appendix 1). 

The proposed crossing method for all watercourses (including the contingency pipeline crossing method 
for the House River [WC8C] in the event HDD is unsuccessful), with the exception of the proposed primary 
House River crossing (WC8P), is an isolated trenched crossing if water is present or open cut crossing 
method if the watercourse is dry or frozen to bottom at the time of construction. Isolated trenched crossing 
construction may be permitted inside the RAP (September 16 to July 15) with regulatory approval, which 
may require additional supplemental studies (i.e., spawning surveys) and mitigation measures. 
Consultation with regulators would be required to determine appropriate mitigation. 

For those crossings that are constructed at watercourses/drainages that do not provide suitable fish habitat 
conditions (Table 3 of Appendix 3), with the mitigation measures that are proposed, no downstream impacts 
on fish or fish habitat are expected. For those crossings where suitable fish habitat occurs, even though the 
potential exists for the combined residual effects discussed above to occur at crossings that are constructed 
under the DFO Self-Assessment Process and Measures to Avoid Causing Harm to Fish and Fish Habitat, 
the combined residual effects are expected to be of low to medium magnitude (Table 6.2.17, point [l]).  

6.2.7.5 Summary 

Mitigation measures have been designed to avoid and reduce the severity of potential effects of the pipeline 
on fish and fish habitat. As identified in Table 6.2.17, there are no situations with regards to fish and fish 
habitat where there is a high probability of occurrence of a permanent or long-term residual environmental 
effect of high magnitude that cannot be technically or economically mitigated. Consequently, it is concluded 
that the residual environmental effects of pipeline construction and operations on fish and fish habitat will 
be not significant. 

6.2.8 Wetlands 

6.2.8.1 Spatial Boundaries 

The spatial boundaries considered for the effects assessment on wetlands considered one or more of the 
following areas: 

• a Footprint Study Area (as defined in Section 1.4); 

• a Wetland LSA; and 

• a Wetland RSA.  

The spatial boundaries of the Wetland LSA (Figure 5.8) for the Project are defined as a 400 m wide band 
centred on the proposed pipeline route centre line (i.e., 200 m on both sides of the centre line) and a 200 m 
band from the proposed compressor station boundary. The spatial boundaries of the Wetland LSA were 
established to consider wetlands directly affected by the Footprint, as well as wetlands potentially 
susceptible to habitat, hydrological and biogeochemical alterations immediately adjacent to the pipeline 
construction right-of-way. This spatial boundary not only encompasses the ZOI in which vegetation is 
expected to be affected by construction and operations of the Project, both directly and indirectly, however, 
in addition it extends further to encompass local surface water connectivity adjacent to the pipeline route. 
The ZOI is unlikely to extend greater than the Wetland LSA boundary due to the implementation of 
mitigation measures during and after construction. The Wetland LSA aligns with the Vegetation LSA, as 
changes in vegetation are expected to be an indicator of effects on wetland function. The Wetland LSA 
encompasses that area where wetlands are to be monitored post-construction. Information on the Wetland 
LSA was gathered through a combination of a helicopter reconnaissance and helicopter-supported ground-
based wetland surveys conducted on June 4, 2013 and May 6, 2014. 

The Wetland RSA (Figure 5.8) is intended to incorporate the area in which wetlands have the potential to 
be affected by construction and operations of the Project. The spatial boundaries of the Wetland RSA 
(Figure 5.8) for the Project are defined as a 30 km wide band extending from the Footprint (i.e., the Footprint 
plus 15 km on both sides of the centre line). Key considerations in defining the Wetland RSA included 
 

   
Page 6-53 

 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
incorporating waterbodies, wetlands and riparian areas within 15 km of the pipeline route that are 
associated with the hydrology of wetlands in the Project area. Information on the Wetland RSA was 
gathered through a desktop review and satellite imagery mapping. 

6.2.8.2 Ecological Context 

The Project is located within the Continental High Boreal Wetland Region, where flat bogs and basin bogs 
are commonly associated with horizontal and ribbed fens and plateau bogs occasionally occur in larger 
fens. The average peat thickness in this wetland region is 2 to 3 m. Marshes can also be found along gently 
sloping lakeshores (Government of Canada 1986). Additional information on the ecological context of the 
Project related to wetlands can be found in Section 5.8 and Appendix 6. 

Wetlands crossed by the pipeline route were initially identified through satellite imagery interpretation using 
key indicators such as terrain, surficial material (i.e., mineral soils or organic peat), vegetation cover and 
the presence or absence of surficial hydrology. Wetland classification and delineations were confirmed 
during the 2013 and 2014 helicopter reconnaissance and helicopter-supported ground-based wetland 
surveys. Wetland surveys within the Footprint describe pre-construction wetland function information for 
wetlands temporarily and directly affected during construction and operations phases of the Project.  

The 2013 and 2014 helicopter reconnaissance and helicopter-supported ground-based wetland surveys 
confirmed that 21 segments (approximately 20.3 km) of wetland ecosystem are crossed by the construction 
right-of-way, comprising approximately 54.9% of the construction right-of-way. A conservative 
measurement of wetland lengths was taken from the widest expanse of each wetland within the construction 
right-of-way. Wetlands crossed include 11 treed fens, 1 shrubby fen, 4 mixedwood treed swamps, 3 shrubby 
swamps, 1 deep marsh and 1 seasonal emergent marsh. 

The proposed compressor station location was evaluated during TERA crew during the 2014 vegetation 
survey the proposed compressor station location is not located within any wetlands. . 

6.2.8.3 Potential Effects, Mitigation Measures and Potential Residual Effects 

The potential effects associated with the construction and operations of the pipeline route on wetland 
function were identified by Aboriginal communities and the assessment team and are listed in Table 6.2.18. 
While members of Christina River Dene Nation Council, Saddle Lake Cree Nation, Willow Lake Métis Local 
No. 780, Fort McMurray Métis Local No. 1935, and Fort McMurray First Nation No. 468 did not participate 
on wetlands studies for the project, they contributed TEK related to wetlands on other biophysical studies 
for the Project. Participants identified concerns regarding impacts of existing development on wetlands 
7.8 m southwest of KP 29.4, as well as concerns regarding ongoing development along the Project footprint 
(Appendix 10). Mitigation measures are included in Table 6.2.18. 

Wetlands are complex ecological systems and, consequently, evaluation of wetlands for the purposes of 
environmental impact assessments tend to focus on wetland function. The Federal Policy on Wetland 
Conservation (FPWC) commits all federal departments to the goal of “no net loss” of wetland function on 
federal lands and waters (Environment Canada 1991, Lynch-Stewart 1992, Lynch-Stewart et al. 1996). 

The objective of the FPWC is to promote conservation of Canada’s wetlands to sustain their ecological and 
socio-economic functions. To support this objective, several goals have been established by the FPWC. 
These objectives include: 

• “no net loss” of wetland function on federal lands or projects; 

• enhancement and rehabilitation of wetlands in areas where the continuing loss or 
degradation of wetlands or their functions have reached critical level; and 

• recognition of wetland functions in resource planning, management and economic 
decision-making with regard to all federal programs, policies and activities. 

Where feasible, the pipeline route has been routed to reduce potential effects on wetlands by implementing 
a routing decision framework that takes into consideration the following: 

 
   

Page 6-54 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
• scheduling construction and clean-up activities during frozen conditions and 

implementing a monitoring program to document wetland function recovery following 
construction to ensure the goal of “no net loss” has been met (Section 9.0); and  

• minimizing length traversing environmentally sensitive areas such as protected, 
endangered or sensitive vegetation and wildlife habitat. 

Mitigation measures recommended to reduce the severity of potential effects on wetland function from 
pipeline construction and operations have been incorporated into Table 6.2.18. These measures were 
developed in accordance with several industry and provincial regulatory guidelines. 

TABLE 6.2.18 
 

POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND RESIDUAL  
EFFECTS OF PROJECT CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS ON WETLANDS 

Potential Effect Components 
Spatial 

Boundary1 
Key Recommendations/Mitigation Measures 

[EPP Reference]2 
Potential Residual 

Effect(s) 
1. Potential loss or 

alteration of 
wetland habitat 
function  

Pipeline LSA • Construct the mineral and shallow open water wetland crossings 
as per COP notifications [Section 7.1]. 

• Reduce the removal of vegetation in wetlands, to the extent 
possible [Section 7.1]. 

• In the event that nonfrozen soils are encountered during 
construction, refer to the Wet Soils Contingency Plan 
(Appendix 1E). Install corduroy, subject to regulatory approval, 
wooden mats or equivalent in areas of wet soils to reduce terrain 
disturbance and soil structure damage. These materials will be 
removed during clean-up [Section 8.2]. 

• Conduct ground level cutting/mowing/mulching of wetland 
vegetation instead of grubbing. The method of removal of wetland 
vegetation is subject to approval by the Company [Section 7.1]. 

• Direct grading away from wetlands [Section 7.1].  
• Reduce grading within wetland boundaries. Do not use temporary 

workspace within the boundaries of wetlands, unless required for 
site specific purposes. Temporary workspace within the boundary 
of a wetland must be approved by the Environmental Inspector(s) 
[Section 7.1]. 

• Prevent ground disturbance by using a protective layer such as 
frost packing, snow, ice or matting, or biodegradable geotextile 
and clay ramps between wetland root/seed bed and construction 
equipment [Section 7.1]. 

• Natural recovery is the preferred method of reclamation. Do not 
seed wetlands [Section 7.1]. 

• Loss or alteration of 
wetland habitat 
function during and 
following 
construction and 
maintenance 
activities until 
vegetation is 
re-established. 

2. Potential loss or 
alteration of 
wetland 
hydrological/ 
biogeochemical 
function 

Pipeline LSA • Refer to measures outlined in the Wet Soils Contingency Plan 
[Appendix 1E]. 

• Install berms, cross ditches and/or silt fences between wetlands 
and disturbed areas when deemed necessary by the 
Environmental Inspector(s) [Section 7.1]. 

• Where the open trench has the potential to dewater a wetland, 
conduct trenching in a manner that prevents the flow of water 
along the trench [Section 8.5]. 

• Replace trench material as soon as possible and re-establish 
pre-construction contours within the wetland boundary to ensure 
cross right-of-way drainage [Section 7.1]. 

• Remove all mats and ramps used so not impede the restoration 
of natural drainage patterns [Section 8.8]. 

• Leave openings in trench crown and all windrows at appropriate 
locations to allow for temporary and permanent cross right-of-way 
drainage [Section 8.6]. 

• Replace grade material to pre-construction contours, except if 
otherwise authorized by the Environmental Inspector(s) or 
designate [Section 8.8]. 

• Loss or alteration of 
wetland hydrological 
function during and 
following 
construction and 
maintenance 
activities until grade 
and natural flow 
patterns are 
restored. 

• Loss or alteration of 
wetland 
biogeochemical 
function during and 
following 
construction and 
maintenance 
activities until 
sedimentation is 
controlled. 

 
   

Page 6-55 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.18  Cont'd 

Potential Effect Components 
Spatial 

Boundary1 
Key Recommendations/Mitigation Measures 

[EPP Reference]2 
Potential Residual 

Effect(s) 
3. Effects of 

accidents and 
malfunctions on 
wetlands 

Pipeline LSA • Do not allow fuel, oil or hazardous material storage within 100 m 
of a watercourse or waterbody, except where secondary 
containment is provided [Section 8.1]. 

• Conduct refuelling at least 100m away from any watercourse or 
waterbody when feasible [Section 8.1]. 

• Equipment to be used in or adjacent to a watercourse or 
waterbody will be clean or otherwise free of external grease, oil or 
other fluids, mud, soil and vegetation, prior to entering the 
waterbody [Section 8.1]. 

• Do not wash equipment or machinery in watercourses or 
waterbodies [Section 8.1]. 

• In the event of a spill refer to the Spill Contingency Plan 
(Appendix 1E) [Section 8.1]. 

• Implement measures outlined in Section 6.2.20 regarding 
accidents and malfunctions. 

• Effects of accidents 
and malfunctions on 
wetlands.  

 

6.2.8.4 Significance Evaluation of Potential Residual Effects 

A qualitative assessment was considered the most appropriate method to evaluate the significance of 
potential residual effects on wetlands, due to the lack of quantitative data and accepted standards, 
guidelines and ecological thresholds. This qualitative assessment relied on available research literature 
(e.g., Shem et al. 1993, Van Dyke et al. 1994) and the professional judgement of the assessment team with 
over 30 years of experience.  

Table 6.2.19 provides a summary of the significance evaluation of potential residual environmental effects 
of the construction and operations of the pipeline route on wetland function. The rationale used to evaluate 
the significance of each of the residual environmental effects is provided below.  

TABLE 6.2.19 
 

CHARACTERIZATION OF POTENTIAL RESIDUAL  
EFFECTS FOR EVALUATION OF SIGNIFICANCE – WETLANDS 

Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
a. Loss or alteration of 

wetland habitat function 
during and following 
construction and 
maintenance activities 
until vegetation is 
re-established 

Impact balance: Negative Wetland habitat function will may be disturbed during construction and/or operations.  
Spatial boundary: Wetland 
LSA 

The loss or alteration of habitat function (e.g., changes in species composition, stress on 
plant species, interruption of wildlife movements and fragmentation of natural habitats) 
resulting from construction of the Project or maintenance activities may extend beyond 
the Project Footprint. Wetland disturbance is not anticipated during proposed 
compressor station construction. 

Duration: Short-Term The event causing loss or alteration of habitat function is pipeline construction or 
maintenance activities (e.g., integrity digs), the latter of which is completed within any 
one year during the operations phase. 

Frequency: Periodic The event causing loss or alteration of habitat function (i.e., construction of the Project 
and maintenance activities) will occur intermittently, however, repeatedly, over the 
assessment period. 

Reversibility: Medium to 
Long-Term  

Depending upon the growth time for wetland species (medium-term for graminoid-
dominant wetlands and long-term for treed wetlands) associated with the wetland, the 
reversibility of the residual effect may take longer than one year along the pipeline route. 
NGTL will consult with the appropriate regulatory agencies (e.g., AESRD, Environment 
Canada) regarding potential remedial or compensatory measures to offset functional 
loss, if warranted, although permanent overall wetland functional loss is not anticipated 
to occur along the pipeline route.  

 

 
   

Page 6-56 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.19  Cont’d 

Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
b. Loss or alteration of 

wetland hydrological 
function during and 
following construction 
and maintenance 
activities until grade and 
natural flow patterns are 
restored 

Magnitude: Low Based on the proposed mitigation measures and available PCM literature, wetlands are 
resilient, provided wetland vegetation is restored and maintained. Long-term alteration 
of wetland habitat function may result during pipeline construction in treed wetlands 
(e.g., treed wetlands will regenerate as emergent graminoid-dominant wetlands). 
Overall wetland function and connectivity on and adjacent to the proposed construction 
right-of-way is anticipated to be maintained.  

Probability: High The pipeline route crosses a number of wetlands and disturbances within these 
wetlands will likely occur during pipeline construction and site-specific maintenance 
activities.  

Confidence: High This is based on available scientific research literature, results of mitigation measures, 
post-construction monitoring programs of past pipeline projects and the experience of 
the assessment team. 

Significance: Not Significant  The potential residual effect is considered to be reversible in the medium to long-term 
and is of low magnitude and, therefore, not significant.  

Impact balance: Negative Wetland hydrological function may be altered or lost during construction and/or 
operations.  

Spatial boundary: Wetland 
LSA 

The loss or alteration of wetland hydrological function (e.g., changes in water level, 
impeded drainage) resulting from construction of the pipeline route may extend beyond 
the construction right-of-way. Wetland disturbance is not anticipated during proposed 
compressor station construction. 

Duration: Short-Term The event causing loss or alteration of wetland hydrological function is the pipeline 
construction or maintenance activities, the latter of which will be completed within any 
one year during the operations phase. 

Frequency: Periodic The event causing loss or alteration of wetland hydrological function (i.e., construction 
of the Project and maintenance activities) will occur intermittently, however, repeatedly, 
over the assessment period. 

Reversibility: Medium-Term Depending upon the time required to restore grade and natural flow patterns the 
reversibility of the residual effect may take longer than one year for wetlands crossed 
by the pipeline route. NGTL will consult with the appropriate regulatory agencies (e.g., 
AESRD, Environment Canada) regarding potential remedial or compensatory measures 
to offset functional loss, if warranted.  

Magnitude: Low Based on the organic wetlands in the Project area that are typically regionally 
expansive features with water levels expected to be low due to the timing of the late 
summer/fall construction schedule, the proposed mitigation measures, available PCM 
literature, wetlands are resilient provided hydrological functions are not permanently 
altered, wetland hydrological function is expected to be maintained.  

Probability: High The pipeline route crosses a number of wetlands and disturbances within these 
wetlands will likely occur during pipeline construction and site-specific maintenance 
activities. 

Confidence: High This is based on available scientific research literature, results of mitigation measures, 
post-construction monitoring programs of past pipeline projects and the experience of 
the assessment team. 

Significance: Not Significant  The potential residual effect is considered to be reversible in the medium-term and is of 
low magnitude and, therefore, not significant. 

c. Loss or alteration of 
wetland biogeochemical 
function during and 
following construction 
and maintenance 
activities until 
sedimentation is 
controlled 

Impact balance: Negative Wetland biogeochemical function may be lost or altered during construction and/or 
maintenance. 

Spatial boundary: Wetland 
LSA 

Loss or alteration of wetland biogeochemical function (e.g., water quality, nutrient 
uptake) resulting from pipeline construction and maintenance activities may extend 
beyond the construction right-of-way. Wetland disturbance is not anticipated during 
proposed compressor station construction. 

Duration: Short-Term The event causing loss or alteration of wetland biogeochemical function is pipeline 
construction and maintenance activities, the latter of which will be completed within any 
one year during the operations phase. 

Frequency: Periodic The event causing loss or alteration of wetland biogeochemical function (i.e., 
construction of the pipeline and maintenance activities) will occur intermittently, 
however, repeatedly, over the assessment period. 

Reversibility: Medium to 
Long-Term 

Depending on the time for biogeochemical processes to be reclaimed, the reversibility 
of the residual effect may take longer than one year with the possibility of being greater 
than 10 years for wetlands crossed by the pipeline route. NGTL will consult with the 
appropriate regulatory agencies (e.g., AESRD, Environment Canada) regarding 
potential remedial or compensatory measures to offset functional loss, if warranted. 

 
   

Page 6-57 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.19  Cont’d 

Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
c. Loss or alteration of 

wetland biogeochemical 
function during and 
following construction 
and maintenance 
activities until 
sedimentation is 
controlled (cont’d) 

Magnitude: Low Based on the anticipated reduced water levels given the fall construction schedule for 
the pipeline component of the Project, the proposed mitigation measures and the 
available PCM literature, wetlands are resilient provided that biogeochemical function is 
not permanently altered.  

Probability: High The pipeline route crosses a number of wetlands and disturbances within these 
wetlands will likely occur during pipeline construction and site-specific maintenance 
activities. 

Confidence: High This is based on available scientific research literature, results of mitigation measures, 
post-construction monitoring programs of past pipeline projects and the professional 
experience of the assessment team. 

Significance: Not Significant  This potential residual effect is reversible in the medium to long-term and of low 
magnitude, and therefore, not significant. 

d. Effects on wetlands from 
accidents or malfunctions 

Impact balance: Negative In the event of an accident or malfunction, adverse effects on wetlands may occur.  
Spatial boundary: Wetland 
LSA 

Reduction of wetland habitat, hydrological and biogeochemical function resulting from a 
spill during construction or maintenance activities or a fire from gas release may extend 
beyond the construction right-of-way. 

Duration: Immediate to 
Short-term 

The event causing potential increased mortality risk, such as a spill or a fire, is 
expected to be generally less than or equal to two days (immediate) and are not 
expected to occur for longer than one year (short-term). 

Frequency: Accidental Contamination of wetlands from spills and gas releases occur rarely over the 
assessment period. 

Reversibility: Short to 
Long-Term 

This will depend upon the volume and area affected by the spill or fire. 

Magnitude: Low to High Potential reduction of wetland habitat function (low) and potential reduction of wetland 
biogeochemical function (low to high). 

Probability: Low Spills and gas releases resulting in fire occur rarely within wetlands. 
Confidence: High This is based on available scientific research literature, results of mitigation measures 

and post-construction monitoring programs of past pipeline projects and the 
professional experience of the assessment team. 

Significance: Not Significant  This potential residual effect is reversible in the short to long-term and of low to high 
magnitude and, therefore, not significant. 

e. Combined effects on 
wetlands 

Impact balance: Negative Residual effect has a net loss or is a detriment to the environment condition. 
Spatial boundary: Wetland 
LSA 

Combined effects on wetlands resulting from construction and maintenance activities 
associated with the Project may extend beyond the Project Footprint. Wetland 
disturbance is not anticipated during proposed compressor station construction. 

Duration: Short-Term The event causing combined effects on wetlands is pipeline construction or 
maintenance activities (e.g., integrity digs), the latter of which is completed within any 
one year during the operations phase. 

Frequency: Periodic The event causing combined effects on wetlands (i.e., construction of the pipeline and 
maintenance activities) or will occur intermittently, however, repeatedly, over the 
assessment period. 

Reversibility: Medium to 
Long-Term 

Depending upon the growth time of wetland species (medium-term) associated with the 
wetland, the time required to restore grade and natural flow patterns (medium-term), 
and the time for biogeochemical processes to be reclaimed (long-term), the reversibility 
of the residual effect may take longer than one year with the possibility of being greater 
than 10 years for wetlands crossed by the pipeline route. For example, comparing a 
treed vs. graminoid wetland, the graminoid wetlands will quickly recover to graminoid 
types whereas treed wetlands will regenerate as emergent graminoid-dominant 
wetlands. NGTL will consult with the appropriate regulatory agencies (e.g., AESRD, 
Environment Canada) regarding potential remedial or compensatory measures to offset 
function loss if warranted.  

 
   

Page 6-58 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.19  Cont’d 

Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
e. Combined effects on 

wetlands (cont’d) 
Magnitude: Low  Based on the anticipated reduced water levels given the late fall/winter construction 

schedule, the proposed mitigation measures and the post-construction environmental 
monitoring literature, wetlands are resilient provided that wetland function is not 
permanently altered. If permanent loss or alteration of wetland function is identified 
upon completion of the monitoring of wetlands post-construction, NGTL will consult with 
the appropriate regulatory agencies (e.g., AESRD, Environment Canada) regarding 
potential remedial or compensatory measures to offset functional loss if warranted. 
However, permanent loss of wetland function is not anticipated at wetlands crossed by 
the pipeline route as pipeline construction through wetlands is considered a temporary 
disturbance and experience indicates that residual effects on wetland function can be 
mitigated. Permanent alteration of wetland habitat function may result during pipeline 
construction (e.g., treed wetlands will regenerate as emergent graminoid-dominant 
wetlands). Overall wetland function and connectivity on and adjacent to the construction 
right-of-way is anticipated to be maintained. 

Probability: Medium to High The pipeline route crosses a number of wetlands and disturbances within these 
wetlands will likely occur during pipeline construction and site-specific maintenance 
activities. 

Confidence: High This is based on available scientific research literature, results of mitigation measures, 
PCM programs of past pipeline projects and the professional experience of the 
assessment team. 

Significance: Not Significant  This potential residual effect is reversible in the medium to long-term and of low 
magnitude and, therefore, not significant.. 

Notes: Significant Residual Environmental Effect: for all elements evaluated, a significant adverse residual effect is defined as a high probability of 
occurrence of a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot be technically or economically mitigated. 

 

Loss or Alteration of Wetland Habitat Function 
Pipeline construction and maintenance activities within wetlands will likely result in some short-term 
disruption of the function of wetlands, and this is considered to have a negative impact balance. Examples 
of potential adverse environmental effects on wetland habitat function are: potential changes in vegetative 
species composition; stress on vegetative species; interruption of wildlife movements; and fragmentation 
of natural habitats.  

With proper construction methods and mitigation measures (i.e., profile contours returned and the 
appropriate protection and use of the seedbanks), these adverse effects can be successfully reduced. For 
example, Zimmerman and Wilkey (1992) monitored wetlands for effects on vegetation for 20 years 
post-disruption from pipeline construction. Findings of these long-term monitoring programs show that 
adjacent natural wetland areas were not altered in habitat type (e.g., species composition) when the proper 
construction and mitigation measures were carried out (i.e., wetland contours and elevations match those 
off the construction right-of-way), no non-native plant species invaded natural areas and the right-of-way 
increased in diversity.  

Additional studies on the effects of pipeline construction on wetland vegetation (Shem et al. 1993, Van 
Dyke et al. 1994) report the following observations. 

• Wetland community effects: at most sites, many plants from adjacent natural areas re-establish 
themselves on the right-of-way. Rights-of-way that have been constructed in a manner where wetland 
function is not lost (e.g., profile contours returned and the appropriate restoration or maintenance of 
the seedbanks through ensuring equipment arrives on-site clean and kept free of vegetative debris 
during construction) appear to have little effect on vegetation in the natural areas. 

• Wetland species diversity: A greater number of wetland plants have been observed on the right-of-way 
than in the adjacent natural area. Rights-of-way increase the number and types of habitats in wetlands 
due to the growth of a variety of succession species within the right-of-way. Although the impact balance 
on wetlands resulting from the disturbance created by the pipeline construction is negative (see 
Table 6.2.19), increased biodiversity on the right-of-way is viewed positively since the plants that are 

 
   

Page 6-59 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
regenerating on the right-of-way are native succession species that occur within the natural wetland 
habitat, and the result is that overall habitat function is not negatively impacted. 

• Construction and management practices: Overall, vegetative cover on rights-of-way in wetlands in a 
variety of control plots (i.e., various wetland types in areas throughout the United States of America) is 
generally well-established within one to three years after pipeline construction when mitigation 
measures included returning wetland contours and elevations to pre-construction conditions. Minor 
differences in the final right-of-way surface elevation can strongly influence the type of vegetation that 
re-establishes on the right-of-way. Other examples of construction and management practices that 
ensure wetland vegetation will re-establish include conducting ground-level cutting, mowing or 
mulching of wetland vegetation instead of grubbing, directing grading away from wetlands and allowing 
natural recovery (i.e., not seeding wetlands). 

The effects of construction of a pipeline right-of-way on wetland vegetation and bird communities were 
investigated up to two years following construction by Santillo (1993). Results showed that at two years 
post-construction, wetlands were dominated by native hydrophytic graminoids. Also, in wetlands with no 
standing water, plant community composition and structure were found to be similar at the end of two years 
following construction to what was observed pre-construction. Finally, results also showed that no new bird 
species were introduced. This was determined to be a result of the different habitat provided on the 
right-of-way after pipeline construction was conducted using appropriate mitigation measures 
(e.g., re-establishing pre-construction contours within wetland boundary to ensure cross right-of-way 
drainage) that ensured seedbanks were restored on the construction right-of-way. 

Increased plant diversity is discussed here as a finding of research presented in peer-reviewed available 
research literature (Santillo 1993, Shem et al. 1993, Van Dyke et al. 1994, Zimmerman and Wilkey 1992). 
The conclusion of the research was that although there was increased native plant diversity as a result of 
pipeline construction, the overall habitat function of the wetlands was not negatively impacted.  

Increased biodiversity is viewed positively since the plants that are regenerating on the right-of-way are 
native wetland species, therefore, wetland habitat is not substantially altered. By opening up the canopy, 
plant species that generally cannot grow beneath a tree or shrub overstory will return to begin the plant 
succession stages and additional species will begin to colonize the area. This increase in biodiversity may 
occur along the pipeline route since disturbed peatlands have tree/shrub cover removed during 
construction. Initially, wetlands that were previously dominated by woody vegetation recover as 
sedge-dominant marshes due to an increased moisture regime as a result of decreased rates of 
evapotranspiration. 

With the implementation of the proposed mitigation measures, the residual effect of pipeline construction 
and maintenance activities on wetland habitat function is considered to be reversible in the medium to 
long-term and of low magnitude (Table 6.2.19, point [a]). 

Loss or Alteration of Wetland Hydrological Function 
Pipeline installation or maintenance may cause potential changes to the hydrologic flow (i.e., surface or 
groundwater flow) of a wetland by diverting water away from the wetland and/or impeding natural flow 
through the wetland. Excessive water diversion (e.g., water utilized to power oil and gas facilities will result 
in an unnatural decrease of water flow within the wetland while flow impedance (i.e., inadequate drainage) 
results in a more saturated wetland habitat.  

Each of these alterations is an interruption to the natural hydrologic regime and is considered to have a 
negative impact balance. Water diversion for the purposes of powering oil and gas facilities through the 
production of steam may result in decreased in water levels within peatlands and mineral wetlands. The 
decrease in water levels may result in the upper most layers of peatlands drying out and in mineral wetlands 
the exposure of bare soil. This could potentially result in a decrease in water availability for wildlife and 
vegetation. It is anticipated that any approved oil and gas facility that is utilizing local water resources would 
have in place an appropriate water management plan. 

The vertical and horizontal water movements in wetlands are readily disrupted by any berm-like structure. 
For example, linear disturbances, such as pipelines and roads, can impound water, resulting in flooding 

 
   

Page 6-60 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
upstream and drying downstream in the wetland. Drying on the downslope face in treed wetlands (i.e., treed 
bogs and fens) can increase tree productivity, water demand and evapotranspiration, which facilitates 
further drying (Baisley 2012, Miller et al. in prep.). In mineral wetlands, this type of disturbance (i.e., drying 
downstream) may also result in increases in productivity of drought tolerant wetland plant species 
(e.g., grasses, some sedges and rushes) and water demand, which, similar to treed wetlands, can lead to 
further drying. The compounded drying can result in permanent alteration of peatland and mineral wetland 
hydrologic regime, overall wetland function and potentially vegetative cover (e.g., treed wetland to forest or 
marsh to wet meadow or moist grassland) (Baisley 2012, Miller et al. in prep., Sherwood 2012). On the 
upstream side, increased saturation from impounded water can result in the loss of trees and other woody 
vegetation, while allowing for the establishment of emergent vegetation in peatlands (Miller 2011). 
Alternatively, in seasonal mineral wetlands, increased inundation may result in the decrease of emergent 
vegetation and the increase in aquatic vegetation and open water characteristics. Prolonged impoundment 
may potentially convert a treed wetland to marsh wetland and a more seasonal mineral wetland into a more 
permanent shallow open water wetland. 

Overlaying woody mulch on replaced peat following pipeline construction can increase the relative humidity 
on the peat surface and decrease evaporative loss thereby reducing the hydrologic impact (Groeneveld 
and Rochefort 2005, Price et al. 2003). However, lessons learned from post-construction environmental 
monitoring programs have shown that the thickness of mulch can have an effect on vegetation growth if 
placed too thickly. In mineral wetlands, improper handling (i.e., salvaged material drying) of salvaged 
mineral soil and wetland substrate can result in loss of salvaged material through wind erosion (i.e., drying 
of material while stockpiled). Improper replacement of soils can affect the permeability of the material (i.e., 
permeable substrate becoming impermeable) as the result of compaction. These issues can affect a 
wetland’s ability to retain and slowly release flood waters to the groundwater, increase evaporative losses 
of stored water and limit a wetland’s water storage capacity.  

Among the most important considerations for limiting disturbances to hydrological function are assuring that 
the restoration of pre-construction elevations and contours is achieved (Gartman 1991), and that there will 
be no unnatural impedance to flow. Short-term disturbances to wetlands are expected during pipeline 
construction. Some alteration of hydrological function in wetlands can be expected during trenching, 
however, a late summer and fall construction schedule in certain areas will reduce potential hydrologic 
changes since water flow is likely to be diminishing from peak levels. If the construction right-of-way in the 
wetland is restored to its pre-construction surface contours and proper hydrologic flow is ensured by 
replacement of salvaged wetland substrates, long-term effects on wetland hydrological function are not 
expected. Post-construction monitoring reports regarding wetland hydrological function 
(TERA Environmental Consultants 2011a-d 2012, 2013a-c) at wetlands along the TMX Anchor Loop Project 
have shown that mitigation measures implemented during construction (e.g., surface contour 
reconstruction) can be successful in returning surface water to pre-construction levels. Through monitoring 
of wetlands along pipeline rights-of-way where NGTL standard mitigation and construction techniques were 
used, natural wetland hydrological function was determined to not be impeded (TERA Environmental 
2011e, 2012a-c, 2014b). Seedbank moisture regime recovery (i.e., vegetation growth due to moisture) has 
proven to occur more slowly since surface material moisture levels are regulated either from vegetation 
removal (resulting in a wetter moisture regime than previous) or the drier conditions commonly present at 
wetland margins.  

Standard pipeline construction and operational activities are designed to avoid circumstances that result in 
diversion and/or natural flow impedance of water in wetlands. Permanent loss or alteration of wetland 
hydrological function is not anticipated at wetlands crossed by the pipeline route as pipeline construction 
through wetlands is considered a temporary disturbance and experience indicates that residual effects on 
wetland hydrological function can be mitigated. With the implementation of the proposed mitigation 
measures, the residual effect of pipeline construction and maintenance activities on wetland hydrology is 
considered to be reversible in the medium-term and of low magnitude (Table 6.2.19, point [b]).  

Loss or Alteration of Wetland Biogeochemical Function 
Changes in wetland hydrologic regime can directly and indirectly affect wetland biogeochemical function. 
Directly, hydrologic regime can affect soil processes, nutrient availability and water chemistry. For example, 
soil decomposition rates are controlled by microbial metabolism, which is affected by temperature and 
oxygen availability. Many microbes preferentially use oxygen, however, under anaerobic, saturated 
conditions, the rate and type of respiration is altered (McLatchey and Reddy 1998). Therefore, 
 

   
Page 6-61 

 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
decomposition rates are maintained by hydrologic regime through saturated conditions. Decomposition of 
organic material can result in an oil film visible at the water’s surface. This type of oil film is naturally 
occurring and common in wetlands. These sheens are odourless, unlike petroleum based sheens, and tend 
to shatter when disturbed while petroleum based sheens tend to quickly reform after disturbance 
(Minnesota Pollution Control Agency 2008, Prince Edward Island Department of Environment, Labour and 
Justice 2014). 

Impounding water flow due to linear disturbance can also directly impact wetland biogeochemistry. Fen 
peatlands receive nutrient inputs primarily from surface and groundwater sources. By impeding water flow, 
nutrient delivery to downstream parts of the wetland is limited. However, recontouring and/or installing 
trench crown breaks may alleviate some of this nutrient stress. 

Activity in or near wetlands during pipeline construction may result in an increased sediment supply and 
turbidity of surface waters (particularly in mineral wetlands), thereby, affecting biogeochemical function of 
the wetland. However, given the implementation of sedimentation control mitigation measures 
(i.e., sediment fencing), the likelihood of alteration in this manner is reduced.  

Indirectly, hydrologic regime can impact biogeochemical function by altering wetland habitat function. For 
example, decreases in water table position can increase tree productivity rates, which could decrease the 
quality of litter deposited to soil to increase nutrient turnover-times. This can change understory community 
composition due to nutrient and light limitations, soil processes (e.g., decomposition rates), as well as 
further stimulating changes in wetland hydrologic regime through increased transpiration and interception 
by root systems (Baisley 2012, Kotowska 2012, Laiho et al. 2003).  

Due to historical peat accumulation, peatlands represent a large reservoir of soil carbon and are estimated 
to store approximately 30% of the world’s soil carbon pool and about 85% of North America’s soil carbon 
(Bridgeham et al. 2006, Zoltai and Martikainen 1996). Differences in peatland microtopography 
(i.e., hummocks versus hollows) help maintain wetland biogeochemical function, particularly carbon cycling 
(Belyea 1996, Benscoter et al. 2011, Malmar and Wallén 1999, Rydin et al. 2006). Removing the 
microtopographical variation within these wetlands through construction removes the important role they 
have within ecosystem function (Lee and Boutin 2006, Turcheneck 1990). However, this effect can be 
reduced by narrowing the construction right-of-way through wetlands and allowing for natural recovery. 

Mitigation measures will be employed during construction and maintenance activities to ensure that the 
severity of potential effects on wetland biogeochemistry is reduced (Table 6.17). However, permanent loss 
or alteration of wetland biogeochemical function is not anticipated at wetlands crossed by the pipeline route 
as pipeline construction through wetlands is considered a temporary disturbance and experience indicates 
that residual effects on wetland function can be mitigated. With the implementation of these measures, the 
residual effects of pipeline construction on wetland biogeochemistry are considered to be reversible in the 
medium to long-term and of low magnitude (Table 6.2.19, point [c]).  

Effects of Accidents and Malfunctions on Wetlands 
In the unlikely event of a major fuel spill from equipment or fuel truck near a waterbody, infiltration into 
surficial deposits and surface water is possible and the effects would be considered to have a negative 
impact balance. However, construction through wetlands will take place during late summer and fall 
conditions when, consequently, the amount of surface water encountered will be reduced and the speed of 
migration of any spill into the groundwater will be limited. The implementation of preventative measures 
(Table 6.2.18) is expected to mitigate spot spills in wetlands. Spill mitigation is expected to result in some 
loss or disturbance of soil, peat and vegetation. With mitigation measures as well as the design of the 
pipeline and safety measures implemented to prevent a release during operations, the likelihood of a 
product release affecting wetlands is considered unlikely.  

In the event of a fire associated with a gas release, wetland habitat could be affected. This residual effect 
is considered to be reversible in the short to long-term depending on the wetland habitat type and hydrology 
present, and is of low to high magnitude (Table 6.2.19, point [d]).  

 
   

Page 6-62 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Combined Effects on Wetlands 
The evaluation of the combined effects of the Project construction and operations activities on wetlands 
considers the individual potential residual effects evaluated in Section 6.2.8 that are likely to occur (effects 
[a] through [c] of Table 6.2.19), and could act in combination on the function of wetlands encountered along 
the pipeline route. 

The following potential residual environmental effects are likely to act in combination to result in overall 
Project effects on wetlands along the pipeline route: 

• loss or alteration of wetland habitat function during and following construction and 
maintenance activities until vegetation is re-established; 

• loss or alteration of wetland hydrological function during and following construction and 
maintenance activities until grade and natural drainage patterns are restored; and 

• loss or alteration of biogeochemical function in wetlands during and following construction 
and maintenance activities until sedimentation is controlled and vegetation is 
re-established. 

The potential reduction of wetland habitat, hydrological and biogeochemical functions in the event of an 
accident or malfunction during construction or fire as a result of a gas release during operations are not 
considered in the combined effects on wetlands since the probability of either occurrence is low. 

The combined effects on wetlands of these potential residual effects occurring at one location would be not 
significant due to the overall low magnitude of the potential effects occurring in combination at a particular 
location. This conclusion is based on the high probability of the successful implementation of mitigation 
measures immediately following construction and maintenance activities to restore the reconstruction 
grade, re-establish natural flow patterns, and control sedimentation (Table 6.2.19, point [e]).  

6.2.8.5 Summary 

As identified in Table 6.2.19, there are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of a 
permanent or long-term residual environmental effect on wetlands of high magnitude that cannot be 
technically or economically mitigated. Consequently, it is concluded that the residual environmental effects 
of pipeline construction and operations on wetlands, and their habitat, hydrological and biogeochemical 
functions, will be not significant. 

6.2.9 Vegetation 

6.2.9.1 Spatial Boundaries 

The spatial boundaries for the effects assessment on vegetation considered one or more of the following 
areas: 

• a Footprint Study Area (as defined in Section 1.4);  

• a Vegetation LSA; and  

• a Vegetation RSA.  

The spatial boundaries of the Vegetation LSA (Figure 5.7) for the Project are defined as a 400 m wide band 
centred on the pipeline route right-of-way (i.e.¸ 200 m on both sides of the centre line) and a 200 m around 
the perimeter of the compressor station and access road, which incorporates the area where both direct 
and indirect Project-specific effects are most likely to occur. The Vegetation LSA was established to 
incorporate the area in which vegetation resources are most likely to be affected by the construction and 
operations of the Project. Key considerations used to establish the spatial boundaries of the Vegetation 
LSA for the Project were the expected distance that changes in light regimen, microclimate, dust effects 
and other edge effects are expected to extend from a disturbed area. Although existing vegetation 
composition will only be altered in the Footprint, vegetation composition in areas adjacent to the Footprint 
 

   
Page 6-63 

 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
will be affected by indirect effects resulting from clearing. These changes are often referred to as edge 
effects. The spatial extent of changes in vegetation composition may be affected by a number of factors. In 
one study, increased light was shown to allow the invasion of shade-intolerant vegetation up to 30 m 
(Ranney et al. 1981). Microclimate changes are known to extend from 10-50 m from the edge of a road 
surface (Forman et al. 2003). Additionally, sand and silt effects from road dust may extend 5-40 m from a 
road surface (Forman et al. 2003). Although, some roadway effects are not applicable to pipeline 
development, equipment travel along the construction right-of-way, the use of temporary access and the 
clearing of native vegetation will result in similar effects in many instances. In addition, previous studies 
have observed edge effects ranging from 20-150 m (where edge effects do not relate to sensitive wildlife 
species) from the disturbance (Sustainable Ecosystems Working Group 2002). Therefore, the Vegetation 
LSA spatial boundary was established to ensure a conservative consideration of the distances that these 
effects are expected to extend (i.e., 200 m on both sides of the pipeline route). 

The spatial boundaries for the Vegetation RSA for the Project are defined as a 5 km wide band centred on 
the pipeline route right-of-way centre line (i.e., 2.5 km on both sides of the centre line) with a 2.5 km buffer 
from the compressor station boundary. Key considerations in defining the Vegetation RSA were the 
separation distance typically used to distinguish one rare plant population from another and the distance at 
which wind effects (as a result of clearing) may extend into an area of native vegetation. Element 
Occurrences are the area in which a species or community is or was present. According to the NatureServe 
methodology, Element Occurrences generally refer to a local population or a stand/patch of a community 
(NatureServe 2002). A Principle Element Occurrence is defined as the occupied habitat that contributes to 
the persistence of a species at that location. Although there are many factors which may be taken into 
account, in general, the minimum separation distance for species Element Occurrences is 1 km 
(NatureServe 2002). The NatureServe methodology is used by provincial conservation data 
centres (including ACIMS) to define records of rare species and communities and rank species rarity 
(ACIMS 2013a). Changes in wind patterns as a result of clearing can affect weed dispersal. Although weed 
dispersal distances depend on a number of factors including the weed species, primary mode of 
reproduction, propagule dispersal vector and context of the infestation, many weed species produce large 
numbers of seeds which are wind dispersed. For example, approximately one third of the species listed in 
the Alberta Weed Regulation belong to the sunflower family (Asteraceae) which is adapted for wind 
dispersal. It has been noted that changes in wind currents may be detected at a distance (from the edge) 
of 100 times the height of the vegetation (Saunders et al. 1991). Based on Phase 3 Forest Inventory 
mapping the taller trees in the Project area are within the 18-24 m height category (AENR 1970). Therefore, 
meteorological edge effects have the potential to influence vegetation up to 2.4 km away 
(Saunders et al. 1991). Based on these concepts, the Vegetation RSA is defined as a 2.5 km wide area on 
both sides of the pipeline route. 

6.2.9.2 Ecological Context 

The Project is situated entirely on forested Crown lands within the Boreal Plains Ecozone (Environment 
Canada 2010b). The Project is located within the Central Mixedwood and the Lower Boreal Highlands 
Natural Subregions of the Boreal Forest Natural Region (Natural Regions Committee 2006). 

The Project encounters mostly native vegetation and parallels existing rights-of-way for approximately 77% 
of its length. The pipeline route traverses the Upper Foothills Subregion and Lower Foothills Subregion of 
the Foothills Natural Region (Natural Regions Committee 2006). Vegetation communities observed along 
the route include coniferous forest, deciduous forest, mixedwood forest, treed fens, bogs and riparian areas 

A vegetation overview was conducted for the Project to identify habitat classes, high rare plant potential 
habitat, forest condition, potential rare plants, potential rare ecological communities along with non-native 
and invasive species with the potential to occur in the vicinity of the pipeline route. Previously recorded rare 
plants and rare ecological communities were also reviewed (Appendix 7). Vegetation surveys were 
conducted at select locations along the pipeline route from July 23 to 25, 2013 and again along the pipeline 
route, compressor station and access road location from July 3 to 9, 2014. 

The purpose of the vegetation surveys was to search for rare plants, rare ecological communities, 
late-successional forests, forest pests and non-native and invasive species during the growing season.  

 
   

Page 6-64 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Aboriginal community representatives were invited to participate in the surveys, and shared TEK related to 
vegetation during field studies for the Project. Saddle Lake Cree Nation and Fort McMurray Metis Local 
No. 1935 participated in the field studies. Participants expressed concerns about effects to medicinal plants 
1.1 m northeast of KP 12.1, 8.9 m southwest of KP 21.9 and 192.9 m north of KP 35.1, as well as concerns 
about impacts on wildlife habitat at 5.6 m north of KP 12.4, and impacts to blueberry harvesting at 43.2 m 
south of KP 7.7 (appendix 10). Mitigation measures are included in Table 6.2.20.  

6.2.9.3 Potential Effects, Mitigation Measures and Potential Residual Effects 

The Project follows existing disturbances as much as practical and the construction right-of-way width has 
been kept to a minimum to the extent practical. Potential effects on vegetation associated with the 
construction and operations of the Project were identified by the assessment team and communities and 
are listed in Table 6.2.20.  

Mitigation measures recommended in the vegetation report (Appendix 7) to reduce the severity of potential 
effects of the Project on vegetation have been incorporated into Table 6.2.20. 

TABLE 6.2.20 
 

POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND RESIDUAL  
EFFECTS OF PROJECT CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS ON VEGETATION 

Potential Effect Component 
Spatial 

Boundary1 
Key Recommendations/Mitigation Measures 

[EPP Reference]2 
Potential Residual 

Effect(s) 
1. Changes to 

composition of 
approximately 
115 ha of native 
vegetation 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

Footprint • Maintain soil productivity and potential for vegetation growth by 
implementing appropriate soil handling measures as outlined in 
Section 6.2.2 of this ESA. 

• Natural recovery is the preferred method of reclamation on level 
terrain where erosion is not expected and in peatland and non-
peatland wetlands [Sections 7.1 and 8.8].  

• Clean-up and reclamation should be completed following 
construction as soon as weather conditions permit [Section 8.8]. 

• Seed riparian and erosion prone areas (i.e., moderate or steep 
slopes) with a native cover crop and seed mix that has been 
approved by the applicable regulatory agency. Seeding will follow 
as close as possible to rough clean-up and surface material 
replacement pending seasonal or weather conditions 
[Section 9.0]. 

• Alteration of 
approximately 
115 ha of native 
vegetation. 

2. Loss or alteration 
of rare plant 
populations or rare 
ecological 
communities 

 Pipeline and 
compressor 
station (at 
areas of native 
vegetation) 

LSA • Rare plant species were observed during the 2013 and 2014 site-
specific vegetation surveys. For the mitigation concerning these 
occurrences, see the Vegetation Technical Report (Appendix 7) 
and the EPP for site specific mitigation (Appendix 1). 

• Restrict the general application of herbicide near rare plants or 
rare ecological communities. Spot spraying, wicking, mowing, or 
hand-picking are acceptable measures for weed control in these 
areas [Section 7.1]. 

• Some disturbance 
or alteration of a 
rare plant 
population or 
ecological 
community, if 
avoidance is not 
possible and 
mitigation 
measures do not 
completely protect 
a site. 

 

 
   

Page 6-65 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.20  Cont'd 

Potential Effect Component 
Spatial 

Boundary1 
Key Recommendations/Mitigation Measures 

[EPP Reference]2 
Potential Residual 

Effect(s) 
3. Weed introduction 

and spread 
Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

RSA • Follow weed mitigation measures outlined in the EPP 
(Appendix 1). 

• Spot spraying, wicking, mowing, or hand-picking are acceptable 
measures for weed control in these areas [Section 7.1]. 

• All equipment must arrive at the Project site clean and free of soil 
or vegetative debris. Equipment will be inspected by the 
Environmental Inspector(s), or designate, and if deemed to be in 
appropriate condition will be identified with a suitable marker or 
tag. Any equipment which arrives in a dirty condition shall not be 
allowed on the right-of-way until it has been cleaned. 
[Section 7.1]. 

• Conduct basic shovel and sweep cleaning or compressed air 
before moving equipment from any site with a Noxious weed 
infestation. Do not allow soil or water from cleaning equipment to 
flow to uninfested areas [Section 7.1]. 

• Additional mitigation to reduce weed growth and spread may be 
warranted if grade/strippings replacement is delayed due to 
construction scheduling [Section 7.1]. 

• Acquire Certificates of Analysis for all seed mixes [Section 8.8].  
• Implement PCM and treat weed infestation on the right-of-way as 

needed [Section 8.8] 
• Implement applicable mitigation measures listed above during 

operations activities (e.g., integrity digs). 

• Weed introduction 
and spread. 

4. Spread of forest 
pests 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station (at 
forested 
areas, 
particularly 
pine 
dominated 
areas) 

RSA • An appropriate strategy for handling and disposing of woody 
material found to be infested with bark beetles will be developed 
in consultation with the appropriate regulatory agency, timber 
disposition Consultation with AESRD has not resulted in any 
known locations of infestation in the Project area. 

• No residual effect 
identified. 

5. Effects of accidents 
and malfunctions 
on vegetation 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

RSA • Implement the measures outlined in Section 6.2.20, regarding 
accidents and malfunctions.  

• In the event of a spill overland or fire implement the Spill 
Contingency Plan and the Fire Contingency Plan, as warranted 
[Appendix 1E]. 

• Effects of 
accidents and 
malfunctions on 
vegetation. 

Notes: 1 LSA = Vegetation LSA; RSA = Vegetation RSA. 
 2 Detailed mitigation measures are outlined in the Project-specific EPP (Appendix 1). 
 

6.2.9.4 Significance Evaluation of Potential Residual Effects 

A combination of quantitative and qualitative methods was considered the most appropriate method to 
evaluate the significance of potential residual effects on vegetation, depending on the availability of 
quantitative data and accepted standards, guidelines and ecological thresholds. Where appropriate, the 
qualitative assessment relied on available research literature and the professional judgement of the 
assessment team.  

Table 6.2.21 provides a summary of the significance evaluation of potential residual environmental effects 
of the construction and operations of the Project on vegetation. The rationale used to evaluate the 
significance of each of the residual environmental effects is provided below. An evaluation of significance 
is not required for those potential effects where no residual effect is identified (i.e., forest pests). 

  

 
   

Page 6-66 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
TABLE 6.2.21 

 
CHARACTERIZATION OF POTENTIAL RESIDUAL  

EFFECTS FOR EVALUATION OF SIGNIFICANCE – VEGETATION 

Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
a. Alteration of 

approximately 
115 ha of native 
vegetation 

Impact balance: 
Negative 

Areas of native vegetation within the Footprint will be disturbed. 

Spatial boundary: 
Footprint 

The alteration of native vegetation is confined to the Footprint where construction and clean-up activities are 
planned to occur. 

Duration: Short-term The event causing alteration of native vegetation is construction of the pipeline, compressor station and 
access road or maintenance activities (e.g., vegetation management, integrity digs), the latter of which is 
completed within any one year during the operations phase. 

Frequency: Isolated to 
Periodic 

The events causing alteration of native vegetation (i.e., construction of the Project, vegetation management, 
integrity digs) will occur intermittently, however, repeatedly, over the assessment period. The compressor 
station construction is an isolated occurrence.  

Reversibility: Medium to 
Long-Term 

Depending upon the growth time required for species in each area (e.g., forb versus tree), it is expected 
that some vegetation may require more than one year but less than or equal to 10 years (medium-term) 
while other species may require more than 10 years to re-establish (long-term). 

Magnitude: Low The route parallels existing linear infrastructure for 77% of its length. The construction of the Project (i.e., 
pipeline, compressor station and access road) will result in the clearing of approximately 115 ha of 
vegetation. 

Probability: High The Project encounters native vegetation. 
Confidence: High The assessment is based on similar past projects and the experience of the assessment team. 
Significance: Not 
Significant  

The changes to native vegetation are reversible in the medium to long-term and are of low magnitude and, 
therefore, not significant. 

b. Loss or alteration 
of rare plant 
populations or rare 
ecological 
communities 

Impact balance: 
Negative 

A disturbance or alteration to a portion of the rare plant population or rare ecological community is likely to 
occur. 

Spatial boundary: 
Vegetation LSA 

The potential disturbance or alteration of a rare plant population or rare ecological community is likely to 
occur in the Footprint, whereas indirect impacts to rare plant populations or rare ecological communities as 
a result of changes in hydrology or light levels may affect populations that extend beyond the Footprint into 
the Vegetation LSA. 

Duration: Short-Term The event causing potential disturbance or alteration of a rare plant population or rare ecological community 
is clearing during the construction of the Project. 

Frequency: Isolated The event causing potential disturbance or alteration of a rare plant population or rare ecological community 
(i.e., construction of the Project) is confined to a specific period. 

Reversibility: Medium to 
Long-Term 

Depending upon the species or community type, it is expected that some vegetation may require more than 
one year but less than or equal to 10 years (medium-term) while other species may require more than 10 
years to re-establish (long-term). 

Magnitude: Low to 
medium 

The potential disturbance or alteration of a rare plant population or rare ecological community is of low to 
medium magnitude since the effect approaches however, is still within environmental standards, whereas 
the indirect impacts to populations or communities is of low magnitude since the effects are expected to be 
detectable however, well within environmental standards. 

Probability: High The Project is located on predominantly native lands, and a number of rare plant populations have been 
observed on the Project Footprint. 

Confidence: High Rare plant surveys have been completed for the Project.  
Significance: Not 
Significant  

The residual effects on rare plant species and ecological communities are reversible in the medium to long-
term and of low to medium magnitude and are, therefore, considered to be not significant. 

c. Weed introduction 
and spread 

Impact balance: 
Negative 

The Project has the potential for the introduction or spread of Noxious weeds and invasive, non-native 
species. 

Spatial boundary: 
Vegetation RSA 

Potential weed introduction and spread resulting from construction and maintenance activities may extend 
beyond the Footprint and Vegetation LSA to the Vegetation RSA. 

Duration: Short-Term The event causing potential weed introduction and spread is construction or maintenance activities (e.g., 
vegetation management, integrity digs), the latter of which is completed within any one year during the 
operations phase. 

Frequency: Periodic The events causing potential weed introduction and spread are construction and maintenance activities 
which occur intermittently, however, repeatedly, over the assessment period. 

Reversibility: Short to 
Medium-Term 

Depending upon the weed species and the size/location of the weed occurrence, it is expected that the 
introduction and spread of weeds can be remediated in the short to medium-term. 

Magnitude: Low Given weed densities are generally low (based on the Project-specific vegetation surveys) and given the 
land use along the pipeline route is predominantly forested and industrial (not agricultural). 

Probability: High The Project is expected to cause some weed introduction and spread. 
Confidence: High The assessment is based on similar past pipeline projects and the experience of the assessment team. 

 
 

   
Page 6-67 

 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.21  Cont’d 

Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
c. Weed introduction 

and spread (cont’d) 
Significance: Not 
Significant  

The residual effect of weed introduction and spread is reversible in the short to medium-term and of low 
magnitude and is, therefore, considered not significant. 

d. Effects of accidents 
and malfunctions 
on vegetation 

Impact balance: 
Negative 

Disturbance of vegetation due to a spill or fire and from associated clean-up and reclamation activities. 

Spatial boundary: 
Vegetation RSA 

A spill or fire resulting from pipeline construction and maintenance and operation activities may extend 
beyond the Footprint and Vegetation LSA to the Vegetation RSA. 

Duration: Immediate to 
Short-term 

The event affecting vegetation, such as a spill or a fire, is expected to be generally less than or equal to 
two days (immediate) and are not expected to occur for longer than one year (short-term). 

Frequency: Accidental An accident or malfunction occurs rarely during the assessment period. 
Reversibility: Short to 
Long-Term 

Depending upon the volume and area affected as a result of an accident or malfunction as well as the 
sensitivity to adverse residual effects of the vegetation affected (e.g., if spills or fires occur in the vicinity of 
rare plant populations or rare ecological communities). 

Magnitude: Low to High Depending upon the type of vegetation affected. Spills or fires affecting common plant species or 
communities would likely be low in magnitude whereas spills or fires affecting a rare plant population or rare 
ecological community could potentially be high. 

Probability: Low It is unlikely that an accident or malfunction will occur. 
Confidence: Moderate Based on similar past projects and the experience of the assessment team combined with the uncertainty of 

whether a fire may occur. 
Significance: Not 
Significant  

The magnitude of a residual effect associated with an accident or malfunction that may result in the loss or 
alteration of a rare plant or ecological community or concern is of low to high magnitude, however, the 
probability is low and, therefore, considered not significant.  

e. Combined effects 
on native 
vegetation 

Impact balance: 
Negative 

The combined effects of the individual potential residual effects could act in combination on native 
vegetation. 

Spatial boundary: 
Vegetation RSA 

Combined effects on native vegetation resulting from pipeline construction may extend beyond the Footprint 
and Vegetation LSA to the Vegetation RSA. 

Duration: Short to 
Medium-Term 

The event causing combined effects on native vegetation is construction of the Project or maintenance 
activities (e.g., vegetation management, integrity digs), the latter of which is completed within any 1 year 
during the operations phase. 

Frequency: Isolated to 
Periodic 

The events causing effects on native vegetation are construction and maintenance activities which occur 
intermittently, however, repeatedly, over the assessment period. 

Reversibility: Short to 
Long-Term 

Depending upon the species, size, location, etc. that is present, combined effects are expected to be 
reversible in the short to long-term.  

Magnitude: Medium Although the magnitude of individual effects acting in combination on native vegetation range from low to 
medium, combined effects on native vegetation would be detectable and approach, however, remain within 
environmental standards. 

Probability: High The Project route crosses native vegetation. 
Confidence: Moderate Based on similar past pipeline projects and the experience of the assessment team.  
Significance: Not 
Significant  

The probability of combined effects on native vegetation is high, however, the magnitude is conservatively 
considered medium and, consequently, the residual effect is not significant. 

Note: Significant Residual Environmental Effect: A high probability of occurrence of a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot 
be technically or economically mitigated. 

 

Alteration of Native Vegetation 
The Project was routed along existing rights-of-way and other linear disturbances to the extent practical. 
As a result, approximately 115 ha of native vegetation will be disturbed or cleared during construction of 
the Project and is considered to have a negative impact balance. Disturbed areas through native vegetation 
segments will be allowed to naturally regenerate or seeded with the appropriate native seed mix and 
although mitigation will reduce the effect, species composition in the disturbed Footprint will be altered. The 
extent of altered vegetation communities will be limited by the implementation of mitigation measures 
outlined in Table 6.2.20 and reclamation measures will speed the recovery of vegetation on the disturbed 
Footprint. No locally or regionally adopted threshold or standard exists against which the incremental 
change in vegetation composition can be assessed. This residual effect is limited to the Footprint, reversible 
in the medium to long-term and of low magnitude (Table 6.2.21, point [a]).  

 
   

Page 6-68 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Rare Plant Species and Ecological Communities 
During the rare plant surveys for the Project, seven ACIMS-listed rare plant species were observed in 2013 
and three additional ACIMS-listed rare plant species were observed in 2014. Protection measures and 
environmental management techniques for rare plants, identified during the surveys are provided in the 
EPP (Appendix 1) and the Vegetation Report (Appendix 7). Mitigation measures for rare plant species 
generally fall into categories of avoidance (e.g., realignment, change of work side, narrowing), reducing 
disturbance (e.g., narrowing, adjusting workspaces, ramping/matting over) and alternative 
construction/reclamation techniques (e.g., salvaging seed or sod, plant propagation, transplanting, 
separate strippings salvage, delay clearing, access management) (Appendix 1). These proposed mitigation 
measures have been used previously on other major pipeline construction projects with good success. The 
following are examples. 

• Golden saxifrage (S2S3) was observed along the Bear River Lateral Loop No. 2 TransCanada Pipeline 
Project. During construction, in summer 2010, the right-of-way was narrowed and contours were 
restored following construction in order to maintain site hydrology. During the first year of the PCM in 
2013, plants were observed both on and off of the right-of-way (NEB 2010a). 

• Northern moonwort (S3) was observed along the Cutbank River Lateral Loop (Bald Mountain Section) 
Pipeline Project. During construction, in the winter and spring of 2011, taking extra workspace was 
avoided and where avoidance was not feasible minimizing compaction of the topsoil was achieved by 
installing ramps or matting with geotextile fabric overlain with excavated subsoil. During the first year 
of PCM, one plant was observed off the right-of-way (NEB 2010b).  

• Riverbank anemone (S3) was observed along the route for the Groundbirch Mainline Pipeline Project. 
During construction, in the fall and winter of 2010, where topsoil was to be stripped, a rare plant 
specialist transplanted some of the impacted plants to a suitable habitat of the right-of-way prior to 
construction. During the second year of PCM in 2013, three plants were observed within the recipient 
site (NEB 2010c). 

Based on the assessment of the rare vascular plants or ecological communities with potential to be 
encountered during construction, the mitigation measures described above are considered likely to be 
appropriate and applicable to the Project. Mitigation for rare plants encountered during construction are 
discussed in the Vegetation Report (Appendix 7) and the EPP (Appendix 1). However, if mitigation 
measures do not completely protect the site, a disturbance or alteration of a portion of the population or 
community may occur. Mitigation measures are developed with a number of factors taken into account that 
include, however, are not limited to:  

• species;  

• population size;  

• rarity;  

• growth form of the plant (i.e., annual, biennial, perennial);  

• construction timing;  

• location of the population with respect to the proposed right-of-way;  

• primary mode of species reproduction;  

• mode and magnitude of propagule dispersal;  

• habitat and proximity of available habitat; and,  

• past mitigation success (of the species or similar species).  

By basing mitigation measures on these factors, any disturbance or alteration of a rare plant or lichen 
population, or ecological community, particularly those ranked S1, would be reduced to a level such that 
the population or community is not placed at risk. Consequently, the residual effects of the construction of 

 
   

Page 6-69 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
the pipeline on rare plant species and ecological communities are reversible in the medium to long-term 
and of low to medium magnitude (Table 6.2.21, point [b]).  

Weed Introduction and Spread 
In general, invasive species are most prevalent where the ground has been disturbed by anthropogenic 
activity. The abundance of weedy species along the pipeline route and at the compressor station during the 
2014 rare plant survey was observed to be low (Appendix 7). Mitigation measures outlined in Table 6.2.20 
are effective industry standard measures to reduce the potential for the introduction and spread of weeds. 
These measures will be implemented during both construction and maintenance of the Project 
(e.g., integrity dig activities along the pipeline route). The residual effect of weed introduction and spread is 
reversible in the short to medium-term and of low magnitude (Table 6.2.21, point [c]). 

Effects of Accidents and Malfunctions on Vegetation 
Depending on the location and volume, disturbance of vegetation could occur as a result of a fire or spill 
and associated clean-up and reclamation activities. Prevention measures are in place to prevent spills or 
fires. The magnitude of this effect would vary depending on the severity of the spill or fire, the location of 
the event, and the plant species or ecological community affected (e.g., the magnitude would be higher if a 
rare plant occurrence or rare ecological community is disturbed). Therefore, the magnitude of the residual 
effect associated with a spill or fire that would result in the loss of rare plant or ecological community would 
potentially be low to high. However, the probability of such an event occurring is low (Table 6.2.21, point [d]). 
See Section 6.2.20 for further discussions of Accidents and Malfunctions.  

Combined Effects on Vegetation 
When the combined effects of the construction and operations of the Project on vegetation are considered, 
the potential combined residual effect identified is: combined effects of the Project on native vegetation. 
The combined effects evaluation considers the individual potential residual effects evaluated in Table 6.2.21 
(residual effects [a] through [d]) that are likely to occur and could act in combination on native vegetation. 
The disturbance of vegetation due to gas related accidents and malfunctions is not considered in the 
combined effects on vegetation since the probability of occurrence of these events is low. 

The following potential residual effects are likely to act in combination to result in overall effects on native 
vegetation: 

• changes to composition of approximately 115 ha of native vegetation; 

• loss or alteration of rare plant populations or rare ecological communities; and 

• weed introduction and spread. 

All of the individual adverse effects identified above have the potential to act in combination on native 
vegetation. The probability of these residual effects acting in combination at any specific location along the 
pipeline route or at the compressor station is high. The magnitude of the combined effects on native 
vegetation is conservatively considered medium and, consequently, the combined effects of the Project on 
native vegetation will be not significant (Table 6.2.21, point [f]). 

6.2.9.5 Summary 

As identified in Table 6.2.21, there are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of a 
permanent or long-term residual environmental effect on vegetation of high magnitude that cannot be 
technically or economically mitigated. Consequently, it is concluded that the residual environmental effects 
of pipeline construction and operations on vegetation will be not significant. 

 
   

Page 6-70 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
6.2.10 Wildlife and Wildlife Habitat 

6.2.10.1 Spatial Boundaries 

The spatial boundaries used in the effects assessment of wildlife and wildlife habitat considered one or 
more of the following areas: 

• a Footprint Study Area (as defined in Section 1.4);  

• a Wildlife LSA;  

• a Wildlife RSA; and 

• a Caribou RSA.  

The Wildlife LSA (Figure 5.9) incorporates the Footprint and adjacent areas of indirect disturbance. The 
Wildlife LSA is defined as an approximately 2 km wide band centred on the pipeline route centre line 
(i.e., 1 km on both sides of the centre line) and 1 km around the perimeter of the compressor station and 
access road, which incorporates the area where both direct and indirect Project-specific effects are most 
likely to occur.  

The Wildlife RSA (Figure 5.9) includes the Wildlife LSA and area beyond it, where there is potential for the 
Project to interact with other activities to contribute to cumulative effects. The RSA is defined as an 
approximately 30 km wide band centred on the pipeline route centre line (i.e., 15 km on both sides of the 
centre line) and 15 km around the perimeter of the compressor station and access road.  

Woodland caribou are of particular concern in the Project area given their conservation status and 
sensitivity to industrial developments, in particular linear corridors, and occurrence close to the pipeline 
route. Information on caribou related to habitat avoidance associated with industrial disturbance is available 
in current literature. Therefore, caribou was the primary species considered when determining appropriate 
spatial boundaries at the local and regional scales for wildlife and wildlife habitat. 

Dyer et al. (2001) demonstrated that woodland caribou are observed to avoid habitat up to a distance of 
1,000 m from industrial developments such as well sites, while 250 m avoidance distances are associated 
with roads and seismic lines. During the operations phase, a pipeline development would be expected to 
have a similar effect on habitat effectiveness as other linear features. However, given the level of habitat 
disturbance, noise and human activity during the construction and reclamation phases of the Project, 
caribou can be expected to exhibit avoidance behaviour similar to well sites or facilities that experience 
higher levels of human activity and noise. As such, the Wildlife LSA boundary is based in part on an indirect 
disturbance area (avoidance area) of 1,000 m on both sides of the Footprint. In addition, the Wildlife LSA 
incorporates the largest recommended setback distance for wildlife species potentially occurring in the 
Project area (e.g., bald eagle) (Government of Alberta 2013a). Setback distances are based on 
expert-derived thresholds at which human disturbance is likely to influence habitat quality or animal 
behaviour, and are, therefore, suitable estimations of indirect habitat disturbance. The Wildlife LSA is 
considered an appropriate size to capture the local effects on wildlife and wildlife habitat likely to result from 
the Project. 

6.2.10.2 Ecological Context 

The effects assessment of wildlife and wildlife habitat in this sub-section of the ESA is comprised of an 
analysis of the wildlife and wildlife habitat present within the Wildlife RSA. Wildlife species with federal or 
provincial conservation status are considered in this overall assessment of wildlife and wildlife habitat, in 
addition to the more common and abundant species that occur in the Wildlife RSA, including those that are 
important for subsistence, economic and cultural reasons (e.g., moose, beaver, black bear, red squirrel, 
etc.). Key species with conservation status were selected as indicators for the Species at Risk assessment 
in Section 6.2.11 to provide a focused species-specific assessment. 

Land use in the Wildlife LSA and RSA includes forestry, hunting, trapping and oil and gas activities. These 
developments and resource uses have resulted in habitat loss and alteration. Clearing of vegetation, the 

 
   

Page 6-71 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
creation of facilities and infrastructure, and sensory disturbance associated with development and resource 
use have affected the historical distribution and movement of wildlife. 

Management objectives and guidelines related to wildlife in the Wildlife RSA are set out by the Government 
of Alberta in the Integrated Standard and Guidelines - Enhanced Approval Process (Government of Alberta 
2013a). This document includes recommendations related to limiting access, setback distances and timing 
restrictions associated with sensitive species and guidelines for working in sensitive species ranges 
(e.g., caribou range). Where applicable, the recommendations in this document are referenced throughout 
the assessment and mitigation measures. 

The proposed compressor station, access road and pipeline route are located within the ESAR caribou 
range. The pipeline route crosses through the Egg-Pony herd for a length of 4.9 km from KP 0 to KP 4.9 
and the Algar herd for a length of 18.9 km from KP 14.3 to KP 33.2 (AESRD 2014a). The pipeline route 
also crosses a KWBZ associated with the House River for a length of 2.3 km from KP 34.0 to KP 36.3 
(AESRD 2014a).  

TEK was gathered and recorded with community members of the Christina River Dene Nation Council, 
Saddle Lake First Cree Nation, Fort McMurray Métis Local No. 1935 and Fort McMurray Métis Local No. 468 
during the wildlife field studies for this Project throughout 2013 and 2014 (Appendix 8 and Appendix 10). 

6.2.10.3 Potential Effects, Mitigation Measures and Potential Residual Effects 

The pipeline route will parallel existing linear disturbance (i.e., pipeline rights-of-way and roads) for 
approximately 28.1 km (77%) of its length. Minor deviations from existing linear disturbance are required to 
facilitate crossing watercourses or avoidance of existing infrastructure. The potential effects associated with 
the construction and operations of the Project on wildlife and wildlife habitat were identified in consultation 
with Aboriginal communities and by the assessment team, and are listed in Table 6.2.22. 

Mitigation measures recommended in the Wildlife Report (Appendix 8) to reduce the potential effects of the 
Project on wildlife and wildlife habitat have been incorporated into Table 6.2.22. These measures were 
developed in accordance with NGTL standards and provincial and federal regulatory guidelines including, 
however, not limited to the following: 

• Environmental Handbook for Pipeline Construction (AENV 1988); 

• Integrated Standards and Guidelines - Enhanced Approval Process (Government of 
Alberta 2013a); 

• Recovery Strategy for the Woodland Caribou (Rangifer tarandu caribou), Boreal 
Population, in Canada (Environment Canada 2012); 

• Petroleum Industry Activity Guidelines for Wildlife Species at Risk in the Prairie and 
Northern Region (Environment Canada 2011a);  

• Environmental Assessment Best Practice Guide for Wildlife at Risk in Canada (Canadian 
Wildlife Service 2004); 

• RM of Wood Buffalo MDP Bylaw No. 11/027 (RM of Wood Buffalo 2011); 

• Lac La Biche County MDP (Lac La Biche County 2013); and 

• LARP (Government of Alberta 2012a). 

Through the implementation of these measures, it is believed that the Project meets the wildlife and 
wildlife-related objectives and directions of the RM of Wood Buffalo MDP (RM of Wood Buffalo 2011), the 
Lac La Biche County MDP (Lac La Biche County 2013) and the LARP (Government of Alberta 2012a). 

The RM of Wood Buffalo MDP outlines a strategic path forward to manage growth over a 20 year period. 
The Plan will be used to guide both short and long-term decision making in the RM of Wood Buffalo. One 

 
   

Page 6-72 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
of the goals of this Plan is environmental stewardship, including directives that support: healthy ecosystems 
that support biodiversity, taking action on climate change, access to clean air and water, and responsible 
waste management. The Plan supports actions that respect natural habitats and ecological corridors, 
protect and restore riparian areas and wetlands and adhere to environmentally responsible practices (RM 
of Wood Buffalo 2011). 

The Lac La Biche County MDP provides a framework for future growth and development within this county. 
One of the goals of this Plan is to protect natural environmental resources including lakes, rivers, wetlands, 
riparian areas, forest, native range and groundwater (Lac La Biche County 2013). 

The LARP identifies strategic directions for the region over a 10 year period to provide guidance to provincial 
and local decision-makers regarding land use management for the region (Government of Alberta 2012a). 
The LARP contains objectives to manage landscapes to maintain ecosystem function and biodiversity. The 
Project is not located within any proposed Conservation Areas identified in the LARP (Government of 
Alberta 2012a). 

  

 
   

Page 6-73 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
TABLE 6.2.22 

 
POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF  

PIPELINE CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS ON WILDLIFE AND WILDLIFE HABITAT 

Potential Effect Component 
Spatial 

Boundary 1 Key Recommendations/Mitigation Measures [EPP Reference]2 
Potential Residual 

Effect(s) 
1. Changes to 

wildlife habitat 
Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

LSA • Clearing and construction activities at the proposed compressor site and 
access road are scheduled to commence during the migratory bird RAP of 
May 1 to August 10 (Gregoire pers. comm.). It is recommended, if feasible, 
that early clearing be conducted. If this is not feasible and activity is 
scheduled to occur within the RAP, non-intrusive methods will be used to 
conduct an area search for evidence of nesting (e.g., presence of singing 
birds, territorial males, alarm calls, distraction displays). In the event an 
active nest is found, it will be subject to site-specific mitigation measures 
(i.e., clearly marked protective buffer around the nest and/or non-intrusive 
monitoring). NGTL will continue to consult with Environment Canada about 
scheduling clearing and construction within the RAP [Table 1]. 

• Clearing and construction activities along the proposed pipeline route are 
scheduled to commence outside the migratory bird RAP. In the event that the 
schedule changes and construction activities are planned during the RAP, it 
is recommended the proposed Project Footprint be cleared prior to May 1 to 
discourage nesting of migratory birds. If this is not feasible and activity is 
scheduled to occur within the RAP, use non-intrusive methods to conduct an 
area search for evidence of nesting (e.g., presence of singing birds, territorial 
males, alarm calls, distraction displays) [Table 1]. 

• If species with special conservation status or a wildlife habitat feature are 
identified during clearing or construction of the Project, implement the Wildlife 
Species of Concern Discovery Contingency Plan [Appendix 1E]. 

• Clear timber, stumps, brush and other vegetation within the marked 
right-of-way, temporary workspace boundaries and marked facility site 
boundaries [Section 8.2]. 

• Locate deck sites in previously-disturbed areas, wherever practical. Avoid 
grading at deck sites. Do not salvage strippings at deck sites. Timber will be 
delimbed prior to being transported to the deck sites [Section 8.2]. 

• Reduce grubbing near watercourses, muskeg, and other wet areas to 
facilitate the restoration of shrub communities [Section 8.2]. 

• Prohibit clearing of extra temporary workspace within 10 m of a watercourse 
to protect riparian areas. This area shall be clearly marked prior to clearing 
operations. The right-of-way will be narrowed through the riparian area, if 
possible [Section 8.4]. 

• Limit clearing at watercourse crossings to the removal of trees and shrubs to 
the ditch line and work side areas required for vehicle crossings 
[Section 8.4].  

• Natural recovery is the preferred method of reclamation on level terrain 
where erosion is not expected [Section 8.8].  

• It is anticipated that the proposed HDD crossing at the House River will 
reduce disturbance of riparian habitat. 

• Seed riparian and erosion prone areas with a native cover crop and seed mix 
that has been approved by the applicable regulatory agency. Seeding will 
follow as close as possible to rough clean-up and surface material 
replacement pending seasonal or weather conditions [Section 8.8]. 

• Replace trench material as soon as possible to re-establish preconstruction 
contours within wetland boundary to ensure cross right-of-way drainage 
[Section 7.1]. 

• Follow the measures for fish and fish habitat identified in Section 6.2.7 to 
reduce the effects on riparian and instream habitat, and the measures in 
Tables 6.2.8 and 6.2.15 to reduce effects on wetland habitat function and 
water quality in wetlands. 

• NGTL will prepare a KWBZ Protection Plan, in consultation with AESRD 
[Table 1]. 

• NGTL will prepare a Caribou Mitigation Plan for the Project, in consultation 
with AESRD [Table 1]. 

• See mitigation measures regarding species at risk in Table 6.2.24. 

• Changes to 
wildlife 
habitat. 

 

  

 
   

Page 6-74 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.22  Cont'd 

Potential Effect Component 
Spatial 

Boundary 1 Key Recommendations/Mitigation Measures [EPP Reference]2 
Potential 

Residual Effect(s) 
2. Changes to 

wildlife 
movement 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

LSA • See mitigation measures regarding migratory birds in point 1 of this table. 
• Ensure that noise abatement equipment on machinery is in good working 

order [Section 8.1]. 
• Leave gaps in windrows (i.e., grubbing piles, strippings, grade spoil, rollback, 

strung pipe) at obvious drainages and wildlife trails. Locations where wildlife 
gaps are appropriate will be determined in the field by the Environmental 
Inspector(s). Gaps should align [Section 7.1].  

• To facilitate the free movement of wildlife, trenching operations will be 
followed as closely as possible by lowering-in and backfill operations, unless 
for construction purposes there is a need to have the trench open for an 
extended period of time. Minimize the amount of open trench at any one time 
[Section 8.5]. 

• Natural recovery is the preferred method of reclamation on level terrain 
where erosion is not expected and in peatland and non-peatland wetlands 
[Sections 7.1 and 8.8] 

• Collect all construction debris and other waste materials and dispose of daily 
at an approved facility and in accordance with the Waste Management Plan 
[Section 8.1]. 

• Install rollback as specified by the Environmental Inspector(s) and approved 
by the applicable regulatory agency [Section 8.8]. 

• Reduce grubbing near watercourses, muskeg, and other wet areas to 
facilitate the restoration of shrub communities [Section 8.2]. 

• Changes to 
wildlife 
movement. 

3. Changes to 
wildlife 
mortality risk 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

RSA • See mitigation measures regarding migratory birds in point 1 of this table. 
• If species with special conservation status or a wildlife habitat feature are 

identified during clearing or construction of the Project, implement the Wildlife 
Species of Concern Discovery Contingency Plan [Appendix 1E]. 

• Prohibit the recreational use of all-terrain vehicles (ATVs) or snowmobiles by 
construction personnel on the right-of-way. [Section 7.1]. 

• Do not permit construction personnel to have dogs on the right-of-way 
[Section 7.1]. 

• Do not harass or feed wildlife [Section 7.1]. 
• Project personnel are not permitted to hunt or fish on the work site 

[Section 7.1]. 
• Firearms are not permitted in project vehicles, on the right-of-way or at 

associated Project facilities [Section 7.1]. 
• The Contractor will collect all construction debris and other waste materials 

and dispose of daily at an approved facility and in accordance with the Waste 
Management Plan [Section 8.1]. 

• If wildlife is discovered in the trench, or in association with any other activity 
or facility, report to the Environmental Inspector(s) who will contact the 
applicable regulatory agencies, as required [Section 7.1]. 

• Where practical, use multi-passenger vehicles for the transport of crews to 
and from job sites [Sections 8.1]. 

• In the event that beaver dams or lodges will be disturbed, provide notification 
or obtain the necessary provincial permits prior to commencing activities. 
Engage the registered trapper(s). [Section 8.4]. 

• Install rollback as specified by the Environmental Inspector(s) and approved 
by the applicable regulatory agency [Section 8.8]. 

• Remove bar ditch ramps and reclaim all temporary access trails and 
shoo-flies to stable conditions. Recontour to pre-construction conditions and 
seed accordingly. [Section 8.8]. 

• See mitigation measures regarding mortality risk for caribou in Table 6.2.24. 

• Changes to 
wildlife 
mortality risk. 

4. Effects of 
accidents and 
malfunctions 
on wildlife 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

LSA • Implement the spill prevention measures outlined in the Fuels and 
Hazardous Materials Contingency Plan [Appendix 1E]. 

• In the event of a spill, implement the Spill Contingency Plan [Appendix 1E]. 
• Implement measures in section 6.2.20 regarding accidents and malfunctions. 

• Effects of 
accidents and 
malfunctions 
on wildlife. 

Notes: 1 LSA = Wildlife LSA; RSA = Wildlife RSA 
 2 Detailed mitigation measures are outlined in the Project-specific EPP (Appendix 1 of the ESA). 

 
   

Page 6-75 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
6.2.10.4 Significance Evaluation of Potential Residual Effects 

The methodology set out in Section 6.1 was adopted for the characterization and significance determination 
for potential residual adverse effects on wildlife and wildlife habitat. All assessment criteria were considered 
when determining the significance of each residual adverse effect. The most influential assessment criteria 
for wildlife and wildlife habitat are magnitude and reversibility. The determinations of significance for the 
potential residual effects on wildlife and wildlife habitat are also strongly influenced by ecological context, 
including relevant conservation, recovery, and land use planning objectives and strategies, which is 
reflected in the criteria ratings for magnitude. Qualitative significance determinations incorporate 
professional judgment, which allows for integration of all effects criteria ratings to provide relevant 
significance conclusions that are sensitive to context and facilitate decision-making (Lawrence 2007). 

There are three primary effect pathways that have potential to affect wildlife and wildlife habitat: changes 
in habitat, movement and mortality risk. The following subsections describe these effect pathways 
(e.g., cause-effect relationships), as well as the potential effects associated with accidents and 
malfunctions. TEK participants identified the following concerns related to wildlife and wildlife habitat: 
construction impacts on wildlife habitat; impacts of increased human access; impacts of potential spills; and 
potential for wildlife to ingest contaminants from machinery. Construction impacts on wildlife habitat are 
considered in the assessment of changes to wildlife habitat. Impacts of increased human access are 
considered in the assessment of changes to wildlife mortality risk. Impacts of potential spills and potential 
for wildlife to ingest contaminants from machinery are considered in the assessment of the effects of 
accidents and malfunctions on wildlife. Table 6.2.23 summarizes the characterization and significance 
determination of potential residual environmental effects of the construction and operations of the Project 
on wildlife and wildlife habitat.  

TABLE 6.2.23 
 

CHARACTERIZATION OF POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS FOR 
EVALUATION OF SIGNIFICANCE – WILDLIFE AND WILDLIFE HABITAT 

Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
a. Changes to wildlife 

habitat 
Impact balance: Negative The effects of Project construction may result in a reduction in quality and quantity of 

wildlife habitat. 
Spatial boundary: Wildlife LSA Direct habitat alteration will occur within the Project Footprint. Indirect changes in 

habitat (e.g., changes in vegetation communities along habitat edges; reduced use or 
avoidance of disturbance; sensory disturbance) will extend beyond the Footprint into 
the Wildlife LSA. 

Duration: Short-Term The events causing potential effects are construction and operational activities (e.g., 
monitoring, vegetation management and site-specific maintenance). 

Frequency: Isolated to Periodic The events causing potential effects (i.e., clearing of the Project Footprint, traffic and 
activity) will occur during pipeline construction and intermittently during operations for 
monitoring, vegetation control and maintenance. With respect to the compressor 
station, the event causing the potential effect of changes to wildlife habitat is 
associated with construction of the compressor station, which is an isolated 
occurrence. 

Reversibility: Long-Term Reversibility of residual effects on wildlife habitat will vary by habitat type. 
Regeneration of disturbed aquatic, herbaceous and shrub-dominant habitats will occur 
in a much shorter timeframe than mature forested habitats, which will take decades to 
regenerate. Sensory disturbance associated with construction is reversible 
immediately upon completion of activities; however, some species may exhibit 
reduced habitat use within a zone of influence adjacent to the Project Footprint until 
natural vegetation has sufficiently regenerated. Regeneration of disturbed vegetation 
will begin during the operations phase of the Project (except for portions of the 
pipeline right-of-way, which will generally be maintained with low vegetation for 
maintenance and operation) and will continue through the decommissioning or 
reclamation phase. Regeneration of vegetation for the compressor station will occur 
once the compressor station is abandoned and the forest habitat is reclaimed. The 
reversibility of adverse residual effects on wildlife habitat is constrained by the time 
required for restoration of mature forests (i.e., long-term). 

Magnitude: Low With the implementation of the proposed mitigation, the residual effect of the 
construction and operations of the Project on wildlife and wildlife habitat is concluded 
to be of low magnitude. 

Probability: High The Project will alter wildlife habitat (e.g., forest, shrublands, watercourses, wetlands). 

 
   

Page 6-76 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.23  Cont’d 

Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
a. Changes to wildlife 

habitat (cont’d) 
Confidence: High The assessment is based on a good understanding of cause-effect relationships and 

data pertinent to the Project area. 
Significance: Not Significant Although the probability of a residual effect on wildlife habitat is high, it is of low 

magnitude and reversible in the long-term and, therefore, is not significant. 
b. Change to wildlife 

movement  
Impact balance: Negative Altered wildlife movements to avoid construction activities, disturbed habitats or the 

compressor station site during operations may result in adverse effects on wildlife, 
such as displacement and potential use of sub-optimal habitats. 

Spatial boundary: Wildlife LSA Changes to wildlife movement patterns extend beyond the Project Footprint to the 
Wildlife LSA. 

Duration: Short-Term The events causing potential effects are construction and operational activities (e.g., 
monitoring, vegetation management and site-specific maintenance). 

Frequency: Periodic to 
Continuous 

Events causing potential effects (i.e., clearing Project Footprint, traffic and activity) will 
occur during pipeline construction and intermittently during operations for monitoring, 
vegetation control and maintenance. With respect to the compressor station, the event 
causing potential effect of changes to wildlife movement is construction and operation 
of the compressor station, which is continuous. 

Reversibility: Long-Term Changes in wildlife movement as a result of barriers or avoidance of construction 
activities and noise are reversible in the short-term upon completion of the 
construction phase. Changes in wildlife movement may extend into the operations 
phase for some wildlife species that exhibit avoidance of habitats within a zone of 
influence adjacent to disturbance. Therefore, the residual effect is considered 
reversible in the long-term, once disturbed vegetation within the Project Footprint 
regenerates to sufficient height and density to alleviate changes in wildlife movement. 
For the compressor station, changes to wildlife movement will be reversible once the 
compressor station is abandoned and forest habitat is reclaimed. 

Magnitude: Low The magnitude of residual effects of pipeline construction and operations on wildlife 
movement is considered low. In addition to the proposed mitigation measures, 77% of 
the length of the pipeline route parallels existing linear disturbance, and the proposed 
compressor station has been sited in an area of existing development (i.e., existing 
pipeline and transmission line rights-of-way) and approximately 840 m southeast of 
Highway 63. 

Probability: High Some wildlife species are likely to alter movement patterns to avoid construction 
activities, disturbed habitats, or the compressor station site during operations. Open 
trench, soil and slash windrows and strung pipe may create barriers to wildlife 
movement during construction. 

Confidence: High The assessment is based on a good understanding of cause-effect relationships and 
data pertinent to the Project area. 

Significance: Not Significant Although the probability of a residual effect on wildlife movement is high, it is of low 
magnitude and reversible in the long-term and, therefore, is not significant. 

c.  Changes to wildlife 
mortality risk 

Impact balance: Negative Project construction and operations may adversely affect wildlife as a result of 
increased mortality risk. 

Spatial boundary: Wildlife RSA The potential increase in wildlife mortality risk during construction may result from 
vehicle collisions to and from the work site (i.e., within the Wildlife RSA). The potential 
increase in mortality risk associated with disturbance of undiscovered occupied habitat 
is restricted to the Footprint. 

Duration: Short-Term The events causing potential changes in mortality risk due to vehicle/wildlife collisions 
and disturbance of occupied habitat are construction and operational activities (e.g., 
monitoring, vegetation management and site-specific maintenance). 

Frequency: Isolated to Periodic The events causing potential effects (i.e., clearing of the Project Footprint, traffic and 
activity) will occur during pipeline construction and intermittently during operations for 
monitoring, vegetation control and maintenance. With respect to the compressor 
station, the event causing the potential effect of changes to wildlife mortality risk is 
construction of the compressor station, which is an isolated occurrence. 

Reversibility: Long-Term Residual effects associated with construction activities or periodic maintenance events 
are reversible in the short-term upon completion of activities. The Project may affect 
mortality risk for some wildlife species as a result of predation risk associated with 
access and habitat edges. As a result, the residual effect is reversible in the long-term, 
once disturbed vegetation within the Project Footprint has sufficiently regenerated to 
alleviate access and edge effects. 

 
   

Page 6-77 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.23  Cont’d 

Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
c.  Changes to wildlife 

mortality risk (cont’d) 
Magnitude: Low Implementation of the proposed mitigation measures is assumed to effectively reduce 

the magnitude of residual effects on wildlife mortality during construction to low. Given 
the location of the Project adjacent to existing disturbance features for most of its 
length, the Project’s residual effect on mortality risk associated with access and edges 
is expected to be negligible. 

Probability: High Due to the nature of construction activities, there is a high potential for increased risk 
of wildlife mortality. 

Confidence: Low to High The assessment is based on a good understanding of cause-effect relationships and 
data pertinent to the Project area for most wildlife species; however, interaction of the 
Project with amphibians during terrestrial life stages is uncertain. 

Significance: Not Significant Although the probability of a residual effect on wildlife mortality risk is high, it is of low 
magnitude and reversible in the long-term and, therefore, is not significant. 

d.  Effects of accidents and 
malfunctions on wildlife 

Impact balance: Negative In the event of an accident or malfunction, adverse effects on wildlife and/or wildlife 
habitat may occur. 

Spatial boundary: Wildlife LSA Accidents and malfunctions are typically confined to the disturbed portions of the 
construction right-of-way or compressor station site. In the unlikely event of a large 
spill, or fire caused by a pipeline failure and gas release, adverse residual effects may 
extend beyond the Project Footprint into the Wildlife LSA or Wildlife RSA. 

Duration: Immediate to 
Short-Term 

The event causing potential increased mortality risk, such as a spill or a fire, is 
expected to be generally less than or equal to two days (immediate) and are not 
expected to occur for longer than one year (short-term). 

Frequency: Accidental Prevention measures are expected to effectively avoid the occurrence of accidents 
and malfunctions such that the frequency of such events would occur rarely, if at all. 

Reversibility: Short to 
Long-Term 

Most spills (e.g., terrestrial spot spills) or fires are likely to be cleaned up and 
remediated within days (short-term), however, larger spills that might occur in an 
aquatic environment or near vegetation that will require clearing to facilitate clean-up 
are reversible in the long-term. 

Magnitude: Low to High Most accidents and malfunctions are expected to be small, restricted to the Project 
Footprint, and readily cleaned up, such that there are little or no measureable effects 
on wildlife and wildlife habitat. However, a large spill that cannot be completely 
cleaned up (e.g., into a water body) or a fire that spreads into the Wildlife LSA or 
beyond could be of high magnitude. 

Probability: Low Preventative measures (e.g., safety training, appropriate construction methods and 
preventative maintenance) are expected to effectively reduce the likelihood of 
accidents and malfunctions. 

Confidence: Moderate Based on the professional experience of the assessment team. 
Significance: Not Significant The probability of a residual effect due to an accident or malfunction is low, is of low to 

high magnitude and reversible in the short to long-term and, therefore, is not 
significant. 

e. Combined effects on 
wildlife and wildlife 
habitat 

Impact balance: Negative Some wildlife are likely to experience adverse residual effects of the Project as a 
result of changes in habitat, movement and mortality risk. 

Spatial boundary: Wildlife LSA The combined effects on wildlife habitat may extend into the Wildlife RSA. 
Duration: Short-Term The events causing combined effects on wildlife and wildlife habitat are construction 

and operational activities (e.g., monitoring, vegetation management and site-specific 
maintenance). 

Frequency: Periodic The events causing combined effects on wildlife and wildlife habitat (i.e., clearing of 
the Project Footprint, traffic and activity) will occur during construction and 
intermittently during operations for monitoring, vegetation control and maintenance. 

Reversibility: Long-Term The reversibility of combined Project effects on wildlife (i.e., change in habitat, 
movement and mortality risk) is constrained by the long-term timeline for reclamation 
of treed habitats. 

Magnitude: Low Given the scope, location and routing of the Project, and with implementation of the 
proposed mitigation, the combined residual effect on wildlife and wildlife habitat is 
concluded to be of low magnitude. 

Probability: High It is likely that some wildlife species will experience residual effects of the Project in 
combination. 

Confidence: Moderate The assessment is based on good understanding of cause-effect relationships using 
data pertinent to the Project area. Uncertainty associated with mortality risk for some 
wildlife reduces the confidence rating to moderate. 

Significance: Not Significant Although the probability of a residual effect on wildlife and wildlife habitat is high, it is 
of low magnitude and reversible in the long-term and, therefore, is not significant. 

 
   

Page 6-78 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Note: Significant Residual Environmental Effect: A high probability of occurrence of a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot 

be technically or economically mitigated. 
 

Changes to Wildlife Habitat 
Changes in wildlife habitat will result from construction and operations of the pipeline, compressor station 
and access road. Clearing of vegetation, strippings salvage and grading activities will result in direct habitat 
loss or alteration. Indirect habitat alteration occurs when habitat is available however, the quality or 
effectiveness of the habitat is changed such that wildlife avoid the habitat or reduce their use of it. Reduced 
habitat effectiveness can occur as a result of fragmentation, creation of edges, or sensory disturbance 
(e.g., noise, artificial light, proximity to facilities and infrastructure, human activity and traffic). Habitat 
fragmentation can cause habitat to become unsuitable for species with large territories or home ranges 
(i.e., patch sizes become too small), alter predator-prey dynamics and allow for increased invasive or 
parasitic species abundance (e.g., cowbird parasitism of songbird nests near forest edges). Changes in 
habitat suitability may also result from changes in vegetation communities due to increased light penetration 
at clearing edges, or from changes in water quality (e.g., siltation, deposition of airborne contaminants). 
Habitat loss and reduced habitat effectiveness can cause displacement of wildlife, and potentially result in 
use of less suitable habitat, reduced foraging ability (Bird et al. 2004), increased energy expenditure 
(Jalkotzy et al. 1997) and lower reproductive success (Habib et al. 2007). The effect of the Project on 
changes in wildlife habitat on species at risk, such as caribou, is discussed in Section 6.2.11. 

Harper et al. (2001) identifies pipeline projects as having an adverse effect on vegetation and, therefore, 
wildlife habitat, due to the complete removal or modification of the pre-construction vegetation pattern and 
subsequent change in ecosystem dynamics (i.e., changes in microclimate, ground cover, soil compaction). 
The adverse habitat effects for most wildlife species are considered minor unless a substantial portion or 
critical element of the habitat is rendered unsuitable by the development (Harper et al. 2001). 

The Footprint (including the pipeline, compressor station and access road) is located on approximately 
29.6 ha (21%) of previously cleared land (e.g., existing cutlines, pipeline rights-of-way and roads) and 
71.6 ha (50%) of regenerating burn. Construction of the Project will result in approximately 31.2 ha and 
12.5 ha of new clearing in forested and wetland areas, respectively. The area of new habitat disturbance is 
reduced through the alignment of the pipeline route adjacent to existing disturbances to the extent practical, 
and through shared workspace where pipeline rights-of-way are paralleled. Approximately 77% of the 
pipeline route parallels existing linear disturbance (i.e., existing pipeline rights-of-way, roads, seismic lines). 
Paralleling existing linear disturbances meets provincial and industry guidelines relating to pipeline routing 
(Government of Alberta 2013a). By paralleling existing disturbances, the fragmentation and isolation of 
habitat patches are reduced. Appropriate reclamation measures will be applied to disturbed areas along 
the pipeline route as outlined in Table 6.2.22.  

In addition to clearing of natural vegetation communities, the pipeline has the potential to alter aquatic 
habitat by changing wetland habitat function or water quality. Amphibians are particularly sensitive to 
changes in water quality or increased siltation that may result from construction in and adjacent to wetlands. 
In peatlands, tree removal during construction and operation often results in an increased soil moisture 
regime altering the wetland type. Commonly, treed bogs and fens revert to sedge dominant marshes due 
to the increased groundwater availability that had previously been lower due to tree uptake. The most 
important considerations for limiting disturbances to hydrologic functions are ensuring that pre-construction 
elevations and contours are achieved (Gartman 1991), and ensuring that there will be no unnatural 
impedance to water flow. Conducting construction activities during a period with relatively low water 
levels/frozen ground conditions and re-establishing pre-construction contours within the wetland boundary 
during reclamation are expected to reduce the effects of construction on water quality due to siltation and 
wetland function, respectively. Additional measures to reduce water quality effects in wetlands and wetland 
habitat function are discussed in Sections 6.2.3 and 6.2.8, and Tables 6.2.5 and 6.2.17, respectively. In the 
event that beaver dams or lodges will be disturbed, an AESRD Wildlife Damage Control License will be 
obtained. The proposed compressor station and access road will not affect any wetland habitat. 

Habitat effectiveness may be affected by noise, light and activity associated with pipeline, compressor 
station and access road construction and operations (e.g., maintenance activities, traffic). Sensory effects 
on wildlife can potentially include habitat loss or reduced habitat effectiveness through avoidance, increased 
energy expenditure, changes in normal behaviours (e.g., feeding) and impaired communication between 

 
   

Page 6-79 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
individuals. For example, moose have been documented to avoid pipeline rights-of-way during construction 
periods (Morgantini 1982 and 1984 in Jalkotzy et al. 1997) and reduce their use of or avoid other linear 
features such as roads, trails and seismic lines (Rolley and Keith 1980, Ferguson and Keith 1982, Collister 
et al. 2003). Wasser et al. (2011) reported moose avoided linear features with no or unknown levels of 
human use and areas near primary roads, however, avoidance effects were not apparent for moose beyond 
several hundred metres of exploration roads. Different species and even individuals of a given species are 
expected to respond differently to sensory disturbances. Various factors affect an animal's response to 
sensory disturbances, such as noise level, frequency distribution, duration, number of events, rate of onset, 
level of existing ambient noise, time of year or day, animal activity and location, animal age and gender.  

The residual effect of the Project on wildlife habitat is reduced by reducing the area of disturbance (i.e., by 
routing adjacent to existing disturbances, utilization of adjacent rights-of-way for workspace, siting the 
compressor station adjacent to an existing infrastructure) and reclamation of the Footprint. Additional 
mitigation will reduce the residual effects of the Project on habitat effectiveness. Scheduling of construction 
activities along the pipeline route outside of the migratory bird nesting period and conducting a nest sweep 
at the proposed compressor station site prior to clearing during the migratory bird RAP will avoid 
disturbance of breeding birds. With the applicable mitigation measures, the residual effect of the Project on 
wildlife habitat is expected to be of low magnitude (Table 6.2.23, point [a]). 

Changes to Wildlife Movement  
Wildlife movement patterns vary between species, with species-specific attributes such as size and life 
stage, and other factors such as time of day and season. Most species will alter their movement to avoid 
construction areas (see wildlife habitat discussion above), however, some species may be less affected by 
human activity and noise during construction, and may use established trails or movement patterns.  

Changes in movement patterns may occur during operation of the compressor station and along the 
pipeline. In some cases, linear developments have been shown to block, delay or deflect ungulate 
movements, potentially restricting or reducing access to some parts of their range (Harper et al. 2001). 
Changes in movement patterns during operations may also occur where the pipeline route is adjacent to 
existing linear corridors, since the increased corridor width may cause an incremental barrier effect for some 
wildlife species. Studies on small mammal movements in the boreal forest have concluded that pipeline 
rights-of-way may act as barriers or filters to movement of flying squirrels, red squirrels and marten 
(Marklevitz 2003).  

Forest gaps have been shown to affect movements of forest birds (Bayne et al. 2005, Fleming and 
Schmiegelow 2002, Desrochers and Hannon 1997). Narrow corridors may act as barriers or filters to boreal 
forest birds, although they do not appear to create large zones of influence with reduced bird use (Bayne 
et al. 2005). Research conducted by Fleming and Schmiegelow (2002) on bird willingness to cross varying 
widths of pipeline rights-of-way (15-16 m, 22-24 m, 32-34 m, and > 50 m) in the boreal forest of Alberta was 
inconclusive due to low sample sizes. However, several species did show an unwillingness to cross even 
narrow corridors. The same study found that bird community structure was affected by the presence of a 
right-of-way and nests adjacent to a narrow right-of-way experienced lower predation rates compared to a 
wider right-of-way. Desrochers and Hannon (1997) found that gaps less than 30 m in width had little effect 
on bird movements, though wider gaps constrained movement for specific species. That study also found 
forested detours strongly facilitated movements around gaps. St. Clair et al. (1998) reported that birds use 
forested detours to move across gaps where they are available. Habitat fragmentation results when barriers 
to movement cause functional separation of habitats into smaller, isolated habitat patches (Andrén 1994, 
Jalkotzy et al. 1997). 

Changes in movement patterns can also occur since some wildlife species may be attracted to 
rights-of-way. For example, linear disturbances may provide a travel route for predators such as wolves 
and bears during operations. Several studies have found that linear corridors are attractive to wolves as 
easy travel routes (Thurber et al. 1994, Stuart-Smith et al. 1997, James 1999). Increased forage availability 
for some wildlife species is expected once vegetation communities regenerate to early seral vegetation 
(e.g., grasses/shrubs and potential for greater berry productivity at clearing edges), which may attract some 
wildlife to the right-of-way, thereby changing their normal movement patterns. With the applicable mitigation 
measures, the residual effect of the construction of the Project on wildlife movement is expected to be of 
low magnitude (Table 6.2.23, point [b]). 

 
   

Page 6-80 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Change in Wildlife Mortality Risk 
The level of mortality risk that will occur due to construction activities will depend on the species guild and 
can be mitigated in part by scheduling. Clearing and constructing outside the migratory bird breeding 
season along the pipeline route or conducting a nest sweep prior to clearing the proposed compressor 
station site will prevent mortality of nesting birds. In the event an active nest is found, it will be subject to 
site-specific mitigation measures (i.e., clearly marked protective buffer around the nest and/or non-intrusive 
monitoring). NGTL will continue to consult with Environment Canada about scheduling clearing and 
construction at the proposed compressor station site within the migratory bird RAP.  Grubbing, strippings 
salvage and grading activities may affect small mammals, amphibians and reptiles that inhabit woody 
debris, litter and soil. Although multi-passenger vehicles will be used to transport crews to and from the job 
site, when practical, and vehicle speed will be limited on the roads accessing the Project, as well as on the 
construction right-of-way, a slight increase in potential for vehicle/wildlife collisions will occur during the 
construction period and, to a lesser extent, during the operations of the pipeline. The proposed mitigation 
measures (Table 6.2.22) to be implemented during construction are expected to reduce the potential for 
wildlife mortality associated with the construction of the pipeline, compressor station and access road. 
Access control measures (e.g., rollback) will also reduce potential increased wildlife mortality risk 
associated with legal and illegal hunting and trapping. 

Some ungulates such as moose may be attracted to linear features as forage availability increases once 
vegetation communities regenerate to early seral vegetation. Moose have been shown to select habitat 
based on forage over security, often preferring early seral, shrub dominated habitats (Wasser et al. 2011) 
with lower densities of coniferous tree cover (Schwartz and Franzmann 1991, Rempel et al. 1997, 
Hebblewhite et al. 2010). Deer are also known to be attracted to recently cleared linear disturbances (Lyon 
and Jensen 1980) given the increased production of forage (Wallmo et al. 1972). Deer easily habituate to 
disturbance corridors, especially those with low human activity (Scott-Brown 1984). Wasser et al. (2011) 
found a positive selection by wolves for linear features and habitat with high suitability for deer. Confidence 
is considered to be low to high, depending on the species (Section 6.2.11.4). With mitigation measures 
implemented, the residual effect of the Project on wildlife mortality risk is expected to be of low magnitude 
(Table 6.2.23, point [c]). 

Effects of Accidents and Malfunctions on Wildlife  
Wildlife mortality or injury and reduced habitat quality (i.e., water quality and vegetation alteration) could 
occur in the event of a spill or fire during construction or operations. Toxic substances that are accidentally 
released or are not properly contained can create exposure pathways for wildlife, water bodies and 
vegetation. The scale of the effect is dependent on the exposure pathway (e.g., ingestion from 
contaminated vegetation, mineral soil or water; inhalation of contaminated air), as well as the size, type and 
location of spill.  

Several contingency plans and emergency response plans will be in place to direct response measures in 
the event there is a spill or hazardous substance release (Section 6.2.20 Accidents and Malfunctions). 
Depending on the severity and location, and the wildlife species affected, the magnitude of the impact of 
an accident or malfunction on wildlife either directly or through environmental pathways (e.g., contaminated 
water) could be high. With implementation of prevention measures, the probability of wildlife mortality or 
injury and reduced habitat quality due to an accident or malfunction is low (Table 6.2.23, point [d]). 

Combined Effects on Wildlife and Wildlife Habitat 
The evaluation of combined effects on wildlife considers all of the potential residual effects that are likely to 
occur as a result of the construction and operations of the Project, and that could act in combination on 
wildlife in the Wildlife RSA. Effects that are considered unlikely (e.g., effects of accidents and malfunctions 
on wildlife) are not included in the combined effects analysis. The residual effects on wildlife and wildlife 
habitat are expected to act in combination differently during the construction and operation phases of the 
Project. These mechanisms are described in the previous subsections. For example, changes in movement 
during construction are mostly likely to occur as a result of barriers, activity and noise, whereas the early 
seral habitat associated with the cleared Project Footprint is likely the primary mechanism changing 
movement patterns during operations (e.g., wide openings filter habitat for some species). 

Combined residual effects associated with changes to wildlife habitat, wildlife movement and wildlife 
mortality risk will extend over the construction phase and into the operations phase (i.e., reversible in the 
 

   
Page 6-81 

 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
long-term). Individually, the magnitude of the residual effects is low. In some situations, combined effects 
of individually low magnitude can result in higher magnitude effects. Given the scope, location and routing 
of the Project, and with implementation of the proposed mitigation measures, the combined residual effect 
on wildlife and wildlife habitat is concluded to be of low magnitude (Table 6.2.23, point [e]). 

6.2.10.5 Summary 

As identified in Table 6.2.23, there are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of a 
permanent or long-term residual environmental effect on wildlife or wildlife habitat of high magnitude that 
cannot be technically or economically mitigated. Consequently, it is concluded that the residual 
environmental effects of pipeline construction and operations on wildlife and wildlife habitat will be not 
significant. 

6.2.11 Species at Risk 

6.2.11.1 Spatial Boundaries 

The spatial boundaries identified in Section 6.2.9.1 and 6.2.10.1 for vegetation and wildlife and wildlife 
habitat, respectively were also used in the effects assessment for species at risk. In addition, a Caribou 
RSA is defined by the Agnes, Algar, Egg-Pony caribou herd boundaries within the ESAR caribou range.  

6.2.11.2 Ecological Context 

During the 2013 vegetation survey, one ACIMS-listed rare vascular plant species and six ACIMS-listed rare 
lichen species were observed along the pipeline route. During the 2014 vegetation survey, two ACIMS-
listed rare moss species and one ACIMS-listed rare lichen species were observed in the Project Footprint. 
No ACIMS-listed rare ecological communities were observed within the LSA. No federally-listed rare 
vascular plants or rare ecological communities were observed during the 2013 or 2014 vegetation surveys. 
The rare plants observed in 2013 and 2014 along the pipeline construction right-of-way are summarized in 
Table 5.9.2. Details regarding the location and abundance of each rare plant population are provided in 
Appendix 7. The potential loss or alteration of rare plant populations or rare ecological communities is 
assessed in Section 6.2.9. 

There are no fish species at risk listed by COSEWIC known or expected to occur within the House River 
sub-basin in the vicinity of the pipeline route (COSEWIC 2014). No provincially-listed species or fish species 
listed as at risk by COSEWIC or the SARA were captured or observed at any of the watercourses during 
the open water aquatic assessments (Appendix 3). However, provincially-listed fish species (i.e., listed as 
May be at Risk or Sensitive) and sportfish may be found in watercourses near or crossed by the pipeline 
route (Table 5.7.1). Some fish species that may be found near the pipeline route are provincially-listed as 
Undetermined due to “...insufficient information, knowledge or data to determine status” (ASRD 2011a). 
The status of species known to occur within the House River sub-basin are identified in Table 5.7.1. The 
potential for fish species of concern being affected by an increase in suspended sediment concentration, 
habitat alteration within the ZOI and increased potential for mortality or injury is addressed in Section 6.2.7. 
Federally listed wildlife species (i.e., COSEWIC or Schedule 1 designation) identified as having potential to 
occur along the Project (based on known ranges and preferred habitat availability) include the following: 
little brown myotis; northern myotis; wolverine; woodland caribou; barn swallow; Canada warbler; common 
nighthawk; horned grebe; olive-sided flycatcher; rusty blackbird; short-eared owl; yellow rail and western 
toad. A search of the FWMIS database identified the occurrence of one federally-listed species, woodland 
caribou, within 1 km of the Project. 
Wildlife field work was conducted along the pipeline route in June 2013 and January 2014, and field work 
was conducted at the compressor station site in June 2013 and July 2014. Four SARA Schedule 1 or 
COSEWIC listed wildlife species or their sign were observed during the June 2013 wildlife survey, including 
woodland caribou, barn swallow, olive-sided flycatcher and western toad. Woodland caribou sign was also 
observed during the winter track count survey in January 2014. The barn swallow was scoped out of the 
following assessment as effects on migratory bird changes in habitat, movement and mortality risk are 
unlikely given that the Project will not impact any suitable nesting habitat for this species (i.e., existing 
buildings, bridges), the timing of construction of the pipeline route, and forest clearing will create open 
habitats, which may increase available foraging habitat for these species.  

 
   

Page 6-82 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
In order to focus the assessment of Project effects on wildlife species at risk, indicators were selected for 
detailed analysis. Wildlife indicators were selected based on their potential to interact with and be adversely 
affected by the Project. 
Species that use open habitats for hunting or nesting including barn swallow, common nighthawk and 
short-eared owl were not assessed because pipeline construction will occur outside of the migratory bird 
nesting period (i.e., effects on migratory bird movement and mortality risk are unlikely) and forest clearing 
will create open habitats, which may increase available habitat for these species. The proposed compressor 
station site is forested and does not provide potential habitat for these species. Therefore, there is a low 
potential for the Project to have an adverse interaction with these species at risk, and they were scoped out 
of the assessment. 
The wildlife species at risk indicators and selection rationale are presented in Table 6.2.24. 

TABLE 6.2.24 
 

RATIONALE FOR WILDLIFE SPECIES AT RISK INDICATOR SELECTION 

Indicator Selection Rationale 
woodland 
caribou 

Potential for Project interaction; conservation status; management and cultural importance; environmental indicator (sensitive to 
disturbance). 

wolverine Potential for Project interaction; management and cultural importance; conservation status; environmental indicator (sensitive to 
environmental change). 

bats Potential for Project interaction (e.g., forest clearing); group includes multiple species with conservation status of concern (e.g., little 
brown myotis, northern myotis); environmental indicator (sensitive to change). 

forest birds  Potential for Project interaction; conservation status; addresses the broader suite of bird species potentially affected in forest habitats; 
represents an important habitat type affected by the Project; various species (at risk and common) are addressed (e.g., Canada warbler). 

olive-sided 
flycatcher 

Potential for Project interaction; conservation status; indicative of potential effects on species relying on open forests with complex 
overstory characteristics, and species that use forest edges, openings and disturbed habitats. 

rusty blackbird Potential for Project interaction; conservation status; environmental indicator (sensitive to disturbance); indicative of potential effects on 
species relying on treed wetland and riparian habitats (e.g., horned grebe, yellow rail). 

western toad Potential for Project interaction; conservation status; environmental indicator (sensitive to environmental change); indicative of potential 
effects on amphibian species requiring connectivity between terrestrial habitats and open water breeding habitat; indicator for other 
amphibian species of conservation status (i.e., Canadian toads). 

 

6.2.11.3 Potential Effects, Mitigation Measures and Potential Residual Effects 

There were no potential effects identified relating to the alteration of riparian habitat for fish species at risk 
since the Project Footprint is not located within the range and habitat of any SARA Schedule 1 or 
COSEWIC-listed fish. Consequently, no evaluation of significance is required for potential effects on fish 
species at risk. As noted, the potential for fish species of concern being affected by Project activities is 
addressed in Section 6.2.7. Similarly, the significance evaluation for the potential loss or alteration of rare 
plant populations or rare ecological communities is provided in Section 6.2.9. 

Three effect pathways are identified as the primary mechanism for the Project to affect wildlife species at 
risk: changes in habitat; changes in movement; and changes in mortality risk (Table 6.2.25). 

Mitigation measures to reduce the potential effects of the pipeline on wildlife species at risk are summarized 
in Table 6.2.25 and were developed in accordance with NGTL standards and industry and provincial 
regulatory guidelines including AENV (1988), Canadian Wildlife Service (2004), Environment Canada 
(2011b, 2012) and Government of Alberta (2013a). The results of field surveys are used to inform the 
development of mitigation measures that will to reduce the potential residual effects of the Project on wildlife 
species at risk. 

There are no species-specific objectives or directions in the RM of Wood Buffalo Municipal Development 
Plan (RM of Wood Buffalo 2011), the Lac La Biche County Municipal Development Plan (Lac La Biche 
County 2014) or the LARP (Government of Alberta 2012a). Please refer to section 6.2.10.3 for a summary 
of the wildlife-related objectives and directions outlined by these plans.  

  

 
   

Page 6-83 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
TABLE 6.2.25 

 
POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND RESIDUAL  

EFFECTS OF PIPELINE CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS ON SPECIES AT RISK 

Potential Effect Component 
Spatial 

Boundary1 Key Recommendations/Mitigation Measures [EPP Reference]2 
Potential Residual 

Effect(s) 
1. Changes in 

habitat, 
movement and 
mortality risk for 
woodland 
caribou 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

RSA • AESRD recommends a timing restriction of February 15 to July 15 within 
caribou range to reduce impacts to pregnant cows and their calves. 
Exceptions include site preparation/construction that is initiated prior to 
February 15, pipeline installations using Class V roads and activities within 
100 m of an all-weather road. Work can continue until adverse ground 
conditions are encountered (Government of Alberta 2013a). Employ an 
"early in/early out" approach to reduce disturbance of caribou by initiating 
activities as early as possible in the winter and working expeditiously to limit 
late winter activities. Consult with AESRD in regard to activity that may occur 
in caribou range during the period of February 15 to July 15 [Table 1, 
Sec. 7.1]. 

• Share existing access with other industrial users, wherever feasible 
[Section 7.1, Table 1]. 

• Clearly delineate areas that have access restrictions. Restrict access to 
essential construction personnel only. Direct all other personnel to the right-
of-way via alternate access routes [Section 6.0]. 

• Where practical, use multi-passenger vehicles for the transport of crews to 
and from job sites [Section 8.1].  

• Implement construction techniques that restrict grubbing to facilitate rapid 
recovery of herbaceous and deciduous woody vegetation species in order to 
provide natural vegetation screens that reduce line-of-sight [Table1]. 

• Use a stump mulcher rather than grubbing on areas where stripping and 
grading is not necessary [Section 8.2].  

• Reduce grubbing near watercourses, muskeg, and other wet areas to 
facilitate the restoration of shrub communities [Section 8.2]. 

• Locate deck sites in previously-disturbed areas, wherever practical. Avoid 
grading at deck sites. Do not salvage strippings at deck sites. Timber will be 
delimbed prior to being transported to the deck sites [Section 8.2] 

• Use a combination of natural recovery and reclamation methods that 
accelerate vegetation regeneration. Accelerated reclamation measures may 
include: site preparation (e.g., mounding) to enhance microsite conditions 
that promote seed germination and/or seedling growth; planting conifer 
seedlings; and willow/shrub staking at riparian areas [Section 7.1, Table 1].  

• Implement measures to control access along new segments (i.e., not 
parallel to existing pipelines and roads) of the proposed pipeline route, at 
intersecting linear corridors (e.g., rollback) or as agreed upon with AESRD. 
Locations for access control will be verified in the field and adjusted as 
needed by the Environmental Inspector(s), in discussion with AESRD 
[Section 7.1, Table 1]. 

• Where segments of the right-of-way require rollback for access management 
or erosion control, ensure sufficient timber of appropriate size is available 
[Section 8.2].  

• Limit vegetation control along the right-of-way during the operations phase 
to the extent feasible [Section 7.1, Table 1]. 

• NGTL will prepare a Caribou Mitigation Plan for the Project, in consultation 
with AESRD [Table 1]. 

• If species with special conservation status are identified during clearing or 
construction of the Project, implement the Wildlife Species of Concern 
Discovery Contingency Plan [Appendix 1E]. 

• Refer to changes to wildlife movement (Table 6.2.22, point 2) for measures 
to limit barriers to movement. 

• Combined 
Project effects 
on woodland 
caribou 
resulting from 
changes in 
habitat, 
movement and 
mortality risk. 

 

 
   

Page 6-84 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.25  Cont'd 

Potential Effect Component 
Spatial 

Boundary1 Key Recommendations/Mitigation Measures [EPP Reference]2 
Potential Residual 

Effect(s) 
2. Changes in 

habitat, 
movement and 
mortality risk for 
wolverine 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

LSA • Where segments of the right-of-way require rollback for access management 
or erosion control, ensure sufficient timber of appropriate size is available 
[Section 8.2]. 

• If species with special conservation status are identified during clearing or 
construction of the Project, implement the Wildlife Species of Concern 
Discovery Contingency Plan [Appendix 1E]. 

• Implement the measures to reduce changes to wildlife habitat in 
Table 6.2.22 (point 1). 

• Combined 
Project effects 
on wolverines 
resulting from a 
change in 
habitat, 
movement and 
mortality risk for 
wolverine. 

3. Changes in 
habitat, 
movement and 
mortality risk for 
bats 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

LSA • If species with special conservation status are identified during clearing or 
construction of the Project, implement the Wildlife Species of Concern 
Discovery Contingency Plan [Appendix 1E]. 

• Clear timber, stumps, brush and other vegetation within the marked right-of-
way, temporary workspace boundaries and marked facility site boundaries 
[Section 8.2]. 

• Natural recovery is the preferred method of reclamation on level terrain 
where erosion is not expected [Section 8.8].  

• Implement the measures to reduce changes to wildlife habitat in 
Table 6.2.22 (point 1).  

• Combined 
Project effects 
on bats 
resulting from a 
change in 
habitat, 
movement and 
mortality risk for 
bats. 

4. Changes in 
habitat, 
movement and 
mortality risk for 
forest birds 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

LSA • Clearing and construction activities at the proposed compressor site and 
access road are scheduled to commence during the migratory bird RAP of 
May 1 to August 10 (Gregoire pers. comm.). It is recommended that early 
clearing be conducted. If this is not feasible and activity is scheduled to occur 
within the RAP, non-intrusive methods will be used to conduct an area 
search for evidence of nesting (e.g., presence of singing birds, territorial 
males, alarm calls, distraction displays). In the event an active nest is found, 
it will be subject to site-specific mitigation measures (i.e., clearly marked 
protective buffer around the nest and/or non-intrusive monitoring). NGTL will 
continue to consult with Environment Canada about scheduling clearing and 
construction within the RAP [Table 1]. 

• Clearing and construction activities along the proposed pipeline route are 
scheduled to commence outside the migratory bird RAP. In the event that 
the schedule changes and construction activities are planned during the 
RAP, it is recommended the proposed Project Footprint be cleared prior to 
May 1 to discourage nesting of migratory birds. If this is not feasible and 
activity is scheduled to occur within the RAP, use non-intrusive methods to 
conduct an area search for evidence of nesting (e.g., presence of singing 
birds, territorial males, alarm calls, distraction displays) [Table 1]. 

• Federally, a 300 m setback is recommended from May 1 to July 31 for 
Canada warbler nests (Environment Canada 2011a). 

• If species with special conservation status are identified during clearing or 
construction of the Project, implement the Wildlife Species of Concern 
Discovery Contingency Plan [Appendix 1E]. 

• Implement the measures to reduce changes to wildlife habitat in 
Table 6.2.22 (point 1).  

• Combined 
Project effects 
on forest birds 
resulting from 
changes in 
habitat, 
movement and 
mortality risk. 

5. Changes in 
habitat, 
movement and 
mortality risk for 
olive-sided 
flycatcher 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

LSA • Clearing and construction activities at the proposed compressor site and 
access road are scheduled to commence during the migratory bird RAP of 
May 1 to August 10 (Gregoire pers. comm.). It is recommended that early 
clearing be conducted. If this is not feasible and activity is scheduled to occur 
within the RAP, non-intrusive methods will be used to conduct an area 
search for evidence of nesting (e.g., presence of singing birds, territorial 
males, alarm calls, distraction displays). In the event an active nest is found, 
it will be subject to site-specific mitigation measures (i.e., clearly marked 
protective buffer around the nest and/or non-intrusive monitoring). NGTL will 
continue to consult with Environment Canada about scheduling clearing and 
construction within the RAP [Table 1]. 

• Combined 
Project effects 
on olive-sided 
flycatcher 
resulting from 
changes in 
habitat, 
movement and 
mortality risk. 

 
   

Page 6-85 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.25  Cont'd 

Potential Effect Component 
Spatial 

Boundary1 Key Recommendations/Mitigation Measures [EPP Reference]2 
Potential Residual 

Effect(s) 
5. Changes in 

habitat, 
movement and 
mortality risk for 
olive-sided 
flycatcher 
(cont’d) 

See above See above • Clearing and construction activities along the proposed pipeline route are 
scheduled to commence outside the migratory bird RAP. In the event that 
the schedule changes and construction activities are planned during the 
RAP, it is recommended the proposed Project Footprint be cleared prior to 
May 1 to discourage nesting of migratory birds. If this is not feasible and 
activity is scheduled to occur within the RAP, use non-intrusive methods to 
conduct an area search for evidence of nesting (e.g., presence of singing 
birds, territorial males, alarm calls, distraction displays) [Table 1]. 

• Federally, a 300 m setback distance is recommended from May 1 to 
August 31 for olive-sided flycatcher nests (Environment Canada 2011a). 

• If species with special conservation status are identified during clearing or 
construction of the Project, implement the Wildlife Species of Concern 
Discovery Contingency Plan [Appendix 1E]. 

• Implement the measures to reduce changes to wildlife habitat in 
Table 6.2.21 (point 1). 

• See above. 

6. Changes in 
habitat, 
movement and 
mortality risk for 
rusty blackbird 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

LSA • Clearing and construction activities along the proposed pipeline route are 
scheduled to commence outside the migratory bird RAP. In the event that 
the schedule changes and construction activities are planned during the 
RAP, it is recommended the proposed Project Footprint be cleared prior to 
May 1 to discourage nesting of migratory birds. If this is not feasible and 
activity is scheduled to occur within the RAP, use non-intrusive methods to 
conduct an area search for evidence of nesting (e.g., presence of singing 
birds, territorial males, alarm calls, distraction displays).  

• Federally, a 300 m setback distance is recommended from May 1 to July 31 
for rusty blackbird nests (Environment Canada 2011a). 

• [Table 1]. 
• If species with special conservation status are identified during clearing or 

construction of the Project, implement the Wildlife Species of Concern 
Discovery Contingency Plan [Appendix 1E]. 

• Implement the measures to reduce changes to wildlife habitat in 
Table 6.2.22 (point 1). 

• Combined 
Project effects 
on rusty 
blackbird 
resulting from 
changes in 
habitat, 
movement and 
mortality risk. 

7. Changes in 
habitat, 
movement and 
mortality risk for 
western toad 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

LSA • Follow the measures for fish and fish habitat identified in Table 6.2.16 to 
reduce effects on riparian habitat (point 1), and the measures for wetlands in 
Tables 6.17 to reduce effects on wetland habitat function and water quality 
in wetlands (e.g., natural recovery, no seeding, re-establish pre-construction 
contours). 

• Clearing and construction activities are scheduled to commence in 
September 2015, which is outside the western toad breeding and 
transformation period (mid-April to early August).  There is no potential 
breeding habitat for western toads at the proposed compressor station and 
access road.  

• Replace trench material as soon as possible, and re-establish 
preconstruction contours within wetland boundary to ensure cross right-of-
way drainage. [Section 7.1]. 

• Natural recovery of wetlands is the preferred method of reclamation. Do not 
seed wetlands [Section 7.1]. 

• Implement the measures to reduce changes to wildlife habitat in 
Table 6.2.22 (point 1). 

• Combined 
Project effects 
on western toad 
resulting from 
changes in 
habitat, 
movement and 
mortality risk. 

Notes: 1 LSA = Species at Risk LSA, RSA = Caribou RSA. 
 2 Detailed mitigation measures are outlined in the Project-specific EPP (Appendix 1 of this ESA). 

 

6.2.11.4 Significance Evaluation of Potential Residual Effects 

As noted in Section 6.2.11.3, there are three primary effect pathways that have potential to affect wildlife 
species at risk: changes in habitat, movement and mortality risk. The following subsections describe these 
effect pathways (e.g., cause-effect relationships). The combined suite of potential adverse effects of the 
Project on habitat, movement and mortality risk constitute the potential residual effect for the species at risk 
indicators (Table 6.2.26). Assessing combined residual effects was determined to be the most appropriate 

 
   

Page 6-86 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
method of evaluating potential adverse effects on the wildlife species at risk indicators because wildlife 
populations and individuals may experience influences of all three effect pathways. 

Potential effects on wildlife and wildlife habitat related to accidents and malfunctions are assessed in 
Section 6.2.20, which also applies to wildlife species at risk. Table 6.2.26 summarizes the significance 
evaluation of potential residual environmental effects of the construction and operation of the pipeline on 
wildlife species at risk.  

The qualitative assessment method was adopted for the characterization and significance determination of 
residual adverse effects on wildlife species at risk. All assessment criteria were considered when 
determining the significance of each residual adverse effect. The most influential assessment criteria for 
wildlife and wildlife habitat are magnitude and reversibility. Quantitative analyses were completed to inform 
the characterization of the magnitude of residual effects. 

TABLE 6.2.26 
 

CHARACTERIZATION OF RESIDUAL EFFECTS FOR 
EVALUATION OF SIGNIFICANCE – SPECIES AT RISK 

Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
Combined Project effects on 
woodland caribou resulting 
from changes in habitat, 
movement and mortality risk 

Impact Balance: Negative Changes in habitat, movement and mortality risk as a result of the Project have 
potential to adversely affect woodland caribou. 

Spatial Boundary: Caribou RSA Habitat changes (e.g., clearing) and alteration of movement (e.g., avoidance of 
construction) will be limited to the Wildlife LSA; however, changes in mortality risk 
(e.g., increased access, traffic) are assessed at the regional scale. 

Duration: Short-Term The events causing potential effects are construction and operational activities (e.g., 
monitoring, vegetation management and site-specific maintenance). 

Frequency: Isolated to Periodic The events causing potential effects (i.e., clearing of the Project Footprint, traffic and 
activity) will occur during pipeline construction and intermittently during operations 
for monitoring, vegetation control and maintenance. With respect to the compressor 
station, the event causing the combined effect on woodland caribou is associated 
with construction of the compressor station, which is an isolated occurrence. 

Reversibility: Long-Term The reversibility of adverse residual effects on caribou is constrained by the time 
required for restoration of forests (i.e., long term). 

Magnitude: High The habitat threshold that provides a measureable probability for a local caribou 
population to be self-sustaining is considered to be 65% undisturbed habitat in a 
range.  Environment Canada (2012) reports that 81% of the ESAR caribou range is 
disturbed, which exceeds the threshold level of disturbance (35%) that will support a 
self-sustaining caribou population. The current level of disturbance in the Agnes, 
Algar and Egg-Pony herd ranges is approximately 86%, 81% and 97%, respectively. 
Therefore, the current level of disturbance is considered to be of high magnitude and 
assumed to be a significant effect for the ESAR range as a whole, and for the 
Agnes, Algar and Egg-Pony herds. The Project will cause additional habitat 
disturbance in the Egg-Pony and Algar herds within the ESAR range. The estimated 
direct habitat disturbance caused by the Project is 51.4 ha and 25.3 ha for the Algar 
and Egg-Pony caribou herds, respectively. This direct disturbance footprint is 
entirely within existing functional disturbance (i.e., existing anthropogenic and fire 
disturbance, plus a 500 m zone of influence around anthropogenic disturbance). 
Given the existing levels of disturbance, the Project does not increase indirect 
disturbance (associated with 500 m buffer around the Project Footprint) in the Egg-
Pony herd range. Within the Algar caribou herd range, the Project increases indirect 
habitat disturbance by approximately 5.5 ha (<0.1% increase in functional 
disturbance from existing conditions). Given the relatively small addition to existing 
disturbance within the Algar and Egg-Pony herd ranges, if the Project were to be 
assessed on its own (without the context of the existing levels of disturbance), the 
residual effect of the Project on woodland caribou would be considered to be 
medium in magnitude. However, given that the existing conditions are well below 
Environment Canada’s target for undisturbed habitat, the existing effects on caribou 
are already considered to be of high magnitude.  Any additional disturbance is, 
therefore, also considered to be of high magnitude. The implementation of site 
specific mitigation and restoration measures, reflected in a Caribou Mitigation Plan 
developed in consultation with AESRD, is expected to reduce the residual effects of 
the Project on woodland caribou.  NGTL is committed to continuing consultation with 
provincial resource managers and federal regulators to refine its mitigation 
strategies and implement measures to avoid, minimize, restore, and offset if 
necessary, Project effects on caribou.    

 
   

Page 6-87 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.26  Cont’d 

Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
Combined Project effects on 
woodland caribou resulting 
from changes in habitat, 
movement and mortality risk 
(cont’d) 

Probability: High The Project will alter habitat, cause sensory disturbance and create new access 
within caribou range. 

Confidence: Moderate The assessment is based on a reasonable understanding of cause-effect 
relationships and data pertinent to the Project area. 

Significance: significant The residual effect on woodland caribou is of high magnitude, reversible in the long-
term and has a high probability of occurrence; therefore, the residual effect on 
woodland caribou is considered to be significant. 

Combined Project effects on 
wolverine resulting from 
changes in habitat, movement 
and mortality risk 

Impact balance: Negative Project construction has potential to adversely affect wolverine as a result of 
changes in habitat, movement and mortality risk. 

Spatial boundary: Wildlife RSA Habitat changes (e.g., clearing) and alteration of movement (e.g., avoidance of 
construction) will be limited to the LSA; however, changes in mortality risk 
(e.g., increased access, traffic) are assessed at the regional scale. 

Duration: Short-Term The events causing potential effects are construction and operational activities (e.g., 
monitoring, vegetation management and site-specific maintenance). 

Frequency: Isolated to Periodic Events causing potential effects (i.e., vegetation removal during pipeline 
construction or site-specific maintenance events; vegetation control during 
operations) will occur intermittently however, repeatedly. With respect to the 
compressor station, the event causing the combined effect on wolverine is 
associated with construction of the compressor station, which is an isolated 
occurrence.  

Reversibility: Long-Term Regeneration of forest vegetation will begin during the operations phase over much 
of the Project Footprint, with the exception of portions of the pipeline right-of-way 
that will be maintained with low vegetation for maintenance and operation. 
Wolverines are expected to avoid the compressor station site while it is operational. 
Regeneration of vegetation at the compressor station will occur once the 
compressor station is abandoned and the forest habitat is reclaimed. Restoration of 
forested habitat to early seral stages will occur within 10 years (i.e., medium-term), 
while restoration to mature or late seral stages will take decades (i.e., long-term). 

Magnitude: Low The Project will potentially affect wolverine through all three effect pathways: 
changes in habitat, movement and mortality risk. Mitigation to reduce new access, 
reduce the area of disturbance and reclaim disturbed areas to natural vegetation will 
reduce the magnitude of potential residual effects from the Project on wolverine. The 
magnitude of the combined residual effect of the Project on wolverine is concluded 
to be low. 

Probability: High The Project will alter habitat and cause sensory disturbance within wolverine range. 
Confidence: Moderate The assessment is based on a good understanding of cause-effect relationships and 

data from outside the Project area. 
Significance: Not significant Although the probability of a residual effect on bat is high, the magnitude is low and 

it is reversible in the long-term and, therefore, is not significant. 
Combined Project effects on 
bats resulting from changes in 
habitat, movement and 
mortality risk 

Impact Balance: Negative Project construction has potential to adversely affect bats as a result of changes in 
habitat, movement and mortality risk. 

Spatial Boundary: Wildlife LSA Changes to habitat may extend beyond the Project Footprint into the Wildlife LSA 
(e.g., edge effects or sensory disturbances). 

Duration: Short-Term The events causing potential effects are construction and operational activities (e.g., 
monitoring, vegetation management and site-specific maintenance). 

Frequency: Isolated to Periodic Events causing potential effects (i.e., vegetation removal during pipeline 
construction or site-specific maintenance events; vegetation control during 
operation) will occur intermittently however, repeatedly. With respect to the 
compressor station, the event causing the combined effect on bats is associated 
with construction of the compressor station, which is an isolated occurrence.  

Reversibility: Long-Term Regeneration of forest vegetation will begin during the operations phase over much 
of the Project Footprint, with the exception of portions of the pipeline right-of-way 
that will be maintained with low vegetation for maintenance and operation. 
Regeneration of vegetation at the compressor station will occur once the 
compressor station is abandoned and the forest habitat is reclaimed. Restoration of 
forested habitat to mature or late seral stages will take decades (i.e., long-term). 

Magnitude: Low Direct habitat disturbance associated with clearing mature forests is likely the 
primary mechanism by which the Project may adversely affect bats. The extent of 
habitat alteration resulting from the Project will be reduced by utilizing shared 
workspace and narrowing the Footprint in riparian areas, and the Footprint will be 
reclaimed to natural vegetation communities, the residual effect of the Project on 
bats is concluded to be low. 

 
 

   
Page 6-88 

 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.26  Cont’d 

Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
Combined Project effects on 
bats resulting from changes in 
habitat, movement and 
mortality risk (cont’d) 

Probability: High The Project will affect forests, edge and open habitats that may be used by bats for 
roosting or foraging. 

Confidence: Moderate The assessment is based on a reasonable understanding of cause-effect 
relationships and data from outside the Project area. 

Significance: Not Significant Although the probability of a residual effect on bat is high, the magnitude is low and 
it is reversible in the long-term and, therefore, is not significant. 

Combined Project effects on 
forest birds resulting from 
changes in habitat, movement 
and mortality risk 

Impact Balance: Negative Project construction has potential to adversely affect forest birds as a result of 
changes in habitat, movement and mortality risk. 

Spatial Boundary: Wildlife LSA Changes to habitat, movement and mortality risk may extend beyond the cleared 
Project Footprint into the Wildlife LSA (e.g., edge effects or sensory disturbances). 

Duration: Short-Term The events causing potential effects are construction and operational activities (e.g., 
monitoring, vegetation management and site-specific maintenance). 

Frequency: Isolated to Periodic Events causing potential effects (i.e., vegetation removal during pipeline 
construction or site-specific maintenance events; vegetation control during 
operation) will occur intermittently however, repeatedly. With respect to the 
compressor station, the event causing the combined Project effects on forest birds is 
associated with construction of the compressor station, which is an isolated 
occurrence. 

Reversibility: Long-Term Regeneration of forest vegetation will begin during the operations phase over much 
of the Project Footprint, with the exception of the compressor station, access road 
and portions of the pipeline right-of-way that will be maintained with low vegetation 
for maintenance and operation. Restoration of forested habitat to mature or late 
seral stages will take decades. Sensory disturbance and mortality risk associated 
with pipeline construction is reversible immediately upon completion of activities. 
Sensory disturbance from the compressor station will occur continuously over the 
operations phase, and is reversible upon decommissioning. The reversibility of all 
three effects mechanisms (i.e., change in habitat, movement and mortality risk) 
combined is long-term. 

Magnitude: Low Given that the area of habitat alteration is reduced by routing the pipeline route 
along existing linear corridors for 77% of its length, and with the implementation of 
the planned mitigation, the residual effect of the pipeline on forest birds is concluded 
to be low magnitude. 

Probability: High The Project will affect habitat for forest birds. 
Confidence: High The assessment is based on a good understanding of cause-effect relationships and 

data pertinent to the Project area. 
Significance: Not Significant Although the probability of a residual effect on forest birds is high, it is of low 

magnitude and reversible in the long-term and, therefore, is not significant. 
Combined Project effects on 
olive-sided flycatcher 
resulting from changes in 
habitat, movement and 
mortality risk 

Impact Balance: Negative Changes in habitat, movement and mortality risk as a result of the Project have 
potential to adversely affect olive-sided flycatcher.  

Spatial Boundary: Wildlife LSA Changes to habitat, movement and mortality risk may extend beyond the cleared 
construction footprint (Project Footprint) into the Wildlife LSA (e.g., edge effects or 
sensory disturbances). 

Duration: Short-Term The events causing potential effects are construction and operational activities (e.g., 
monitoring, vegetation management and site-specific maintenance). 

Frequency: Isolated to Periodic Events causing potential effects (i.e., vegetation removal during pipeline 
construction or site-specific maintenance events; vegetation control during 
operation) will occur intermittently however, repeatedly. With respect to the 
compressor station, the event causing the combined effects on olive-sided flycatcher 
is associated with construction of the compressor station, which is an isolated 
occurrence. 

 
   

Page 6-89 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.26  Cont’d 

Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
Combined Project effects on 
olive-sided flycatcher 
resulting from changes in 
habitat, movement and 
mortality risk (cont’d) 

Reversibility: Long-Term Olive-sided flycatchers are considered an early post-fire dependent species and 
make use of natural openings. The Project will increase open habitat; however, 
anthropogenic disturbances may act as ecological sinks. Therefore, habitat on the 
disturbed Project Footprint may not be effective for olive-sided flycatcher until the 
forest structure no longer has characteristics of a human development. 
Regeneration of forest vegetation will begin during the operations phase over much 
of the Project Footprint, with the exception of the compressor station, access road 
and portions of the pipeline right-of-way that will be maintained with low vegetation 
for maintenance and operation. Restoration of forested habitat to mature or late 
seral stages with natural openings will take decades. Sensory disturbance and 
mortality risk associated with construction is reversible immediately upon completion 
of activities. Sensory disturbance from the compressor station will occur 
continuously over the operations phase, and is reversible upon decommissioning. 
The reversibility of all three effects mechanisms (i.e., change in habitat, movement 
and mortality risk) combined is long-term. 

Magnitude: Low  The implementation of the planned mitigation measures, including scheduling 
clearing outside of the migratory bird nesting period along the proposed pipeline 
route or conducting a nest sweep at the compressor station site prior to clear during 
the migratory bird RAP, reducing the area of disturbance by utilizing shared 
workspace, grubbing near watercourses, muskeg, and other wet areas to facilitate 
the restoration of shrub communities, and reclamation of the Footprint through 
natural recovery or seeding, is expected to reduce the residual effects related to 
effects on olive-sided flycatcher to low magnitude. 

Probability: High The Project will affect habitats for olive-sided flycatcher. 
Confidence: Moderate The assessment is based on a good understanding of cause-effect relationships and 

data pertinent to the Project area. 
Significance: Not Significant Although the probability of a residual effect on olive-sided flycatcher is high, it is of 

low magnitude and reversible in the long-term and, therefore, is not significant. 
Combined Project effects on 
rusty blackbird resulting from 
changes in habitat, movement 
and mortality risk 

Impact Balance: Negative Changes in habitat, movement and mortality risk as a result of the Project have 
potential to adversely affect rusty blackbird.  

Spatial Boundary: Wildlife LSA Changes to habitat, movement and mortality risk may extend beyond the cleared 
construction footprint (Project Footprint) into the Wildlife LSA (e.g., edge effects or 
sensory disturbances). 

Duration: Short-Term The events causing potential effects are construction and operational activities (e.g., 
monitoring, vegetation management and site-specific maintenance). 

Frequency: Periodic Events causing potential effects (i.e., vegetation removal during construction or site-
specific maintenance events; vegetation control during operation) will occur 
intermittently however, repeatedly. 

Reversibility: Long-Term Rusty blackbirds rely on treed riparian wetland habitats. Residual effects of clearing 
for the Project on treed wetlands are expected to extend over the long-term. 
Sensory disturbance and mortality risk associated with construction is reversible 
immediately upon completion of activities. Sensory disturbance from the compressor 
station will occur continuously over the operations phase, and is reversible upon 
decommissioning. The reversibility of all three effects mechanisms (i.e., change in 
habitat, movement and mortality risk) combined is long-term. 

Magnitude: Low  The implementation of the planned mitigation measures, including scheduling 
clearing outside of the migratory bird nesting period, reducing grubbing near 
wetlands to facilitate the restoration of shrub communities, and implementing 
wetland mitigation measures in Table 6.17 is expected to reduce the residual effects 
related to effects on rusty blackbird to low magnitude. 

Probability: High The Project will affect habitats for rusty blackbird. 
Confidence: Moderate The assessment is based on a good understanding of cause-effect relationships and 

data pertinent to the Project area. 
Significance: Not Significant Although the probability of a residual effect on rusty blackbird is high, it is of low 

magnitude and reversible in the long-term and, therefore, is not significant. 

 
   

Page 6-90 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.26  Cont’d 

Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
Combined Project effects on 
western toad resulting from 
changes in habitat, movement 
and mortality risk 

Impact Balance: Negative Changes in habitat, movement and mortality risk as a result of the Project have 
potential to adversely affect western toad. 

Spatial Boundary: Wildlife LSA Changes in habitat, movement and mortality risk will primarily be focused on the 
Project Footprint, however, may extend into the Wildlife LSA. 

Duration: Short-Term The events causing potential effects are construction and operational activities (e.g., 
monitoring, vegetation management and site-specific maintenance). 

Frequency: Isolated to Periodic Events causing potential effects (i.e., vegetation removal during pipeline 
construction or site-specific maintenance events; vegetation control during 
operations) will occur intermittently however, repeatedly. With respect to the 
compressor station, the event causing the combined Project effects on western toad 
is associated with construction of the compressor station, which is an isolated 
occurrence. 

Reversibility: Long-Term Regeneration of disturbed riparian and wetland vegetation will begin during the 
operations phase. Establishment of herbaceous and shrub wetland and riparian 
vegetation will occur in a much shorter timeframe than forested riparian, treed 
wetland, and upland forest habitats. Sensory disturbance and mortality risk 
associated with construction is reversible immediately upon completion of activities. 
The reversibility of all three effects mechanisms (i.e., change in habitat, movement 
and mortality risk) combined is long-term. 

Magnitude: Low The implementation of the planned mitigation measures, including scheduling 
clearing and construction outside of the western toad breeding season, recontouring 
wetlands following construction, using construction techniques that restrict grubbing 
near wetlands and using natural recovery at wetlands, is expected to reduce the 
residual effects on western toads to low magnitude. 

Probability: High The Project will affect wetland habitats and adjacent terrestrial habitat. 
Confidence: Low  The assessment is based on a good understanding of cause-effect relationships and 

data pertinent to the Project area; however, interaction of the Project with 
amphibians during terrestrial life stages is uncertain. 

Significance: Not Significant Although the probability of a residual effect on western toad is high, it is of low 
magnitude and reversible in the long-term and, therefore, is not significant. 

Notes: Significant Residual Environmental Effect: A high probability of occurrence of a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot 
be technically or economically mitigated. 

 

Woodland Caribou 
The proposed compressor station, access road and pipeline route is located in the ESAR caribou range 
(AESRD 2014a), which contains the ranges of Algar and Egg-Pony herds, among others. The pipeline route 
crosses through the Egg-Pony caribou range for a length of 4.9 km from KP 0 to KP 4.9 and the Algar 
caribou range for a length of 18.9 km from KP 14.3 to KP 33.2 (AESRD 2014a). 

Woodland caribou is listed as Threatened on Schedule 1 of SARA, by COSEWIC and under the Alberta 
Wildlife Act, and is listed as At Risk in Alberta (AESRD 2014i, ASRD 2010, COSEWIC 2014, Environment 
Canada 2014c). Factors affecting the size and distribution of woodland caribou herds include habitat 
change (loss, fragmentation or alteration) as a result of natural processes (e.g., forest fires) or human land 
use activities (e.g., industrial activities), predation, hunting, poaching and vehicle collisions (Alberta 
Woodland Caribou Recovery Team 2005). 

According to A Woodland Caribou Policy for Alberta, the following management efforts are crucial to the 
stabilization and recovery of woodland caribou populations: 

• maintaining caribou habitat;  

• restoring disturbed habitat; 

• prudent management of the land base and associated development; and 

• effective management of wildlife populations (e.g., predators and other prey species) 
(Government of Alberta 2011). 

 
   

Page 6-91 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
According to the Alberta Woodland Recovery Plan 2004/05-2013/14, the ESAR caribou herd is in decline 
(Alberta Woodland Caribou Recovery Team 2005). For herds that are in decline, the following actions are 
recommended by the Alberta Woodland Caribou Recovery Team (2005): 

• industrial activities on the caribou range must be addressed; 

• predator management and/or management of other prey species may be required; 

• measures to eliminate any hunting or poaching of caribou; and 

• herd trends and distribution must be monitored to evaluate recovery actions. 

The federal recovery goal for the boreal population of woodland caribou is to achieve self-sustaining local 
populations in all caribou ranges throughout their current distribution in Canada (Environment 
Canada 2012). The Recovery Strategy for the Woodland Caribou (Rangifer tarandus caribou), Boreal 
population, in Canada identifies critical habitat for the boreal population of woodland caribou as: 

• the area within the boundary of each caribou range that provides an overall ecological 
condition that will allow for an ongoing recruitment and retirement cycle of habitat, which 
maintains a minimum of 65% of the area as undisturbed habitat; and  

• biophysical attributes required by boreal caribou to carry out life processes (Environment 
Canada 2012).  

Therefore, the habitat threshold that provides a measureable probability for a local caribou population to be 
self-sustaining is considered to be 65% undisturbed habitat within the range (Environment Canada 2012). 
Environment Canada (2012) reports that the population trend for the ESAR caribou range is declining and 
considers the ESAR caribou range to be not self-sustaining. For boreal caribou ranges that are not self-
sustaining and with less than a minimum of 65% undisturbed habitat, the restoration of disturbed habitat to 
a minimum of 65% undisturbed habitat will be necessary. The population objective for all not self-sustaining 
herds, including the ESAR caribou herd, is to stabilize and achieve self-sustaining status (Environment 
Canada 2012). 

Environment Canada (2012) reports that the current non-overlapping habitat disturbance of the ESAR 
caribou range is 81% (77% anthropogenic, 26% fire; note that anthropogenic and fire disturbances that 
overlap are not counted twice in the total), which is greater than the threshold of 35% disturbed habitat in a 
range. Given that the existing conditions are well below Environment Canada’s target for undisturbed 
habitat required for a sustainable caribou population, the existing effects on caribou in the ESAR caribou 
range are already considered to be of high magnitude. Any additional disturbance is, therefore, also 
considered to be of high magnitude.  

Change in Habitat  
Woodland caribou (Threatened on Schedule 1 of SARA and by COSEWIC) in Alberta are found in bogs 
and fens with low to moderate tree cover and tend to avoid marshes, uplands, heavily forested wetlands, 
water and areas of human use (Thomas and Gray 2002). Local caribou population ranges encompass 
areas large enough for all life processes (calving, rutting, wintering, etc.). Therefore, woodland caribou 
require large tracts of continuous undisturbed habitat since they generally disperse when calving to reduce 
predation risk (Vistnes and Nellemann 2001, Environment Canada 2011b). Preferred habitat is typically 
mature old coniferous forest (e.g., Jack pine and black spruce) with abundant lichen, muskeg and peatlands 
intermixed with upland or hilly areas (Brown et al. 1986, Bradshaw et al. 1995, Stuart-Smith et al. 1997, 
Neufeld 2006, O’Brien et al. 2006, Brown et al. 2007, Rettie and Messier 2000, Courtois and Ouellet 2007). 
In general, sufficient canopy-cover or wind-exposed areas are required to keep snow depth at low enough 
levels to allow foraging (LaPerriere and Lent 1977, Collins and Smith 1991, Schaefer and Pruitt 1991). 
Woodland caribou and/or their sign (cratering, pellets, tracks) were observed along the pipeline route near 
KP 3.4 in the Egg-Pony herd caribou range, and between KP 16.2 to KP 19.3, near KP 30.0 and KP 31.8 
(see Appendix 8 for details). 

 
   

Page 6-92 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
NGTL is discussing the timing of construction of the compressor station and associated access road with 
AESRD; subject to regulatory approval, the construction of the compressor station will start in May 2015 in 
consultation with AESRD. Along the pipeline route, all efforts shall be made to complete construction and 
clean-up activities prior to February 15 in order to avoid the timing restriction of February 15 to July 15 
recommended by AESRD to reduce impacts to pregnant cows and their calves. Consistent with provincial 
guidelines (Government of Alberta 2013a), sensory disturbance to woodland caribou as a result of 
construction and reclamation activities will be reduced by employing an “early in/early out” approach to 
initiate activities as early as possible in the winter and work expeditiously to limit late winter activities. 
Scheduling of site-specific maintenance activities will also follow these guidelines to avoid sensitive periods 
for caribou. 

Within the Egg-Pony and Algar caribou range, approximately 16.4 ha (17%) of the Project Footprint 
overlaps existing anthropogenic disturbance (e.g., pipeline rights-of-way, roads, seismic lines), and 70.9 ha 
(74%) was burned by a total of three fires in 1981, 1995 and the House River fire in 2002 (AESRD 2014i). 
Clearing of the Project Footprint (including the pipeline route, compressor station and access road) will 
result in 25.3 ha of new direct disturbance in the Egg-Pony herd boundaries (representing an incremental 
increase in direct anthropogenic disturbance of 0.4% relative to the existing conditions) and 54.1 ha of new 
direct disturbance in the Algar herd boundaries (representing an incremental increase in direct 
anthropogenic disturbance of 0.1% relative to the existing conditions) (see Table 7.31 in Section 7.2.9.2 for 
details).  

Environment Canada (2012) identifies disturbed habitat as the combined effects of fire that has occurred 
within 40 years and buffered (500 m) anthropogenic disturbances. The Project Footprint is located entirely 
within the 500 m buffer of existing anthropogenic disturbances and burned areas within 40 years. Given the 
existing levels of disturbance, the Project does not increase indirect disturbance associated with the 500 m 
buffer around the Project Footprint in the Egg-Pony herd range. Within the Algar caribou herd range, the 
Project increases indirect habitat disturbance by approximately 5.5 ha (<0.1% increase in functional 
disturbance from existing conditions).  

In order to reduce the predicted effects of the Project’s construction and operation on caribou and caribou 
habitat, NGTL will develop and implement a Caribou Mitigation Plan, which will be provided to the AESRD. 
The Caribou Mitigation Plan is a resource manager engagement tool that will provide information on 
planning considerations and available mitigation measures that could be feasibly implemented within the 
Project Footprint to reduce potential effects of the Project on caribou and their habitat. The planning and 
mitigation measures identified in the Caribou Mitigation Plan will comprise a “toolbox” of measures available 
to NGTL, proven and emerging, to reduce the Project’s residual effects on caribou and caribou habitat.  

The Caribou Mitigation Plan will include information on mitigation measures to be implemented prior to, 
during and following construction. A combination of tools will be implemented to achieve the desired 
outcome, and monitoring and adaptive management will inform continuous improvement. The appropriate 
mitigation will be determined in consultation with regulators in consideration of regulatory standard and 
expectations on the pipeline industry, as well as engineering and construction constraints, knowledge 
shared in TEK and TLU studies and the likelihood of contributing effectively to caribou recovery over time. 
Mitigation measures to reduce the effects of the Project on caribou habitat, which will be provided in further 
detail in the Caribou Mitigation Plan, include: implementing construction techniques (i.e., NGTL minimal 
disturbance techniques) that restrict grubbing to facilitate rapid recovery of herbaceous and deciduous 
woody vegetation species, limiting clearing at watercourse crossings to the removal of trees and shrubs to 
the ditch line and work side areas required for vehicle crossings, using a combination of natural recovery 
and accelerated methods of reclamation (e.g., site preparation to enhance microsite conditions that promote 
seed germination and/or seeding growth, planting conifer seedlings, willow/shrub staking at riparian areas), 
and limiting vegetation control along the right-of-way during operation.    

NGTL is committed to continuing consultation with provincial resource managers and federal regulators to 
refine its mitigation strategies and implement measures to avoid, minimize, restore, and offset if necessary, 
Project effects on caribou. The Caribou Mitigation Plan will be filed with the NEB following NGTL’s ongoing 
discussions with AESRD and Environment Canada in advance of construction.   

 
   

Page 6-93 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Change in Movement 
Studies have concluded that pipelines do not create a movement barrier to boreal caribou (Joint Pipeline 
Office 1999, Carruthers and Jakimchuk 1987 in Dyer et al. 2002), except where they parallel roads with 
traffic (Curatolo and Murphy 1986). The pipeline route parallels an existing pipeline right-of-way and a 
formerly used access road from KP 15.2 to KP 16.5 (as defined by IHS Inc. 2014b) within the Algar herd 
caribou range. This access road is overgrown with vegetation and appears to be more of a cutline than a 
road, has no traffic use in the summer and is not plowed during the winter. Seismic lines (which, like 
pipelines during operation, receive little traffic or activity) have been found to not create a barrier to caribou 
movement (Dyer et al. 2002). Dyer et al. (2001) demonstrated that woodland caribou are observed to avoid 
habitat up to a distance of 1,000 m from industrial developments such as well sites, so it is expected that 
caribou will avoid the proposed compressor station by 1,000 m. 

Change in Mortality Risk 
Boreal woodland caribou use habitat and spatial separation from alternate prey and predators to limit 
predation. Grey wolves are the primary predator of boreal woodland caribou, with black bears also 
contributing to predation pressure on some populations (British Columbia Ministry of Environment 2010). 
Kusyk (2002) suggests that wolf hunting behaviour may change when landscapes are altered by industrial 
development, which may affect predation risk. Although predators (e.g., grey wolves, bears) and primary 
prey (e.g., moose) are typically associated with well-drained upland habitats, linear corridors such as 
seismic lines, roads and pipelines create access into the extensive low-gradient peatland habitats types 
selected by caribou to avoid predation pressure. Linear corridors provide easier access and improved 
sightlines for predators such as wolves, which are known to travel 2.9 times faster on linear corridors (James 
1999). Several studies have found that linear corridors are attractive to wolves as easy travel routes 
(Thurber et al. 1994, Stuart-Smith et al. 1997, James 1999) and may affect wolf-prey dynamics (Bergerud 
et al. 1984, Edmonds and Bloomfield 1984, Rohner and Kuzyk 2000). Higher rates of travel may increase 
the encounter rates between wolves or other predators and their prey, resulting in more frequent kills.  

Licensed hunting of caribou has not been permitted in Alberta since 1981. However, improved access into 
caribou ranges as a result of an expanding network of linear corridors may lead to illegal hunting of caribou 
(ASRD and Alberta Conservation Association [ACA] 2010).  

The pipeline route will create approximately 2.3 km of new linear corridor (i.e., not parallel to existing 
pipeline rights-of-way, roads, seismic lines) within the Egg-Pony herd range and no new linear corridor 
within the Algar herd range. Increased mortality risk to caribou as a result of increased access is reduced 
by aligning the pipeline route to parallel existing linear disturbance for approximately 90% of the pipeline 
length in caribou range, incorporating doglegs in the pipeline routing to reduce line-of-sight; and 
implementation of access control and line-of-sight measures, which will be detailed in the Caribou Mitigation 
Plan (see Table 6.2.26, point [a]).  

Summary 
The habitat threshold that provides a measureable probability for a local caribou population to be self-
sustaining is considered to be 65% undisturbed habitat in a range, and Environment Canada (2012) reports 
that the current non-overlapping habitat disturbance of the ESAR caribou range is 81%, which is greater 
than the threshold of 35% disturbed habitat in a range. The Project will result in 25.3 ha of new direct 
disturbance in the Egg-Pony herd boundaries (representing an incremental increase in direct anthropogenic 
disturbance of 0.4% relative to the existing conditions) and 54.1 ha of new disturbance in the Algar herd 
boundaries (representing an incremental increase in direct anthropogenic disturbance of 0.1% relative to 
the existing conditions). This direct disturbance footprint is entirely within existing functional disturbance 
(i.e., existing anthropogenic and fire disturbance, plus a 500 m buffer around anthropogenic disturbance). 
Given the existing levels of disturbance, the Project does not increase indirect disturbance associated with 
the 500 m buffer around the Project Footprint in the Egg-Pony herd range. Within the Algar caribou herd 
range, the Project increases indirect habitat disturbance by approximately 5.5 ha (<0.1% increase in 
functional disturbance from existing conditions). Given the relatively small addition to existing disturbance 
within the Algar and Egg-Pony herd ranges, if the Project were to be assessed on its own (without the 
context of the existing levels of disturbance), the residual effect of the Project on woodland caribou would 
be considered to be medium in magnitude. However, given that the existing conditions are well below 

 
   

Page 6-94 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Environment Canada’s target for undisturbed habitat, the existing effects on caribou are already considered 
to be of high magnitude. Any additional disturbance is, therefore, also considered to be of high magnitude. 
The implementation of site specific mitigation and restoration measures, reflected in a Caribou Mitigation 
Plan developed in consultation with AESRD, is expected to reduce the residual effects of the Project on 
woodland caribou. NGTL is committed to continuing consultation with provincial resource managers and 
federal regulators to refine its mitigation strategies and implement measures to avoid, minimize, restore, 
and offset if necessary, Project effects on caribou.    

The combined Project effects on woodland caribou resulting from changes in habitat, movement and 
mortality risk is of high magnitude, reversible in the long-term and has a high probability of occurrence; 
therefore, the residual effect on woodland caribou is considered to be significant (Table 6.2.26, point [a]). 

Wolverine 

Change in Habitat 
Wolverine is listed by COSEWIC as Special Concern and is designated as May Be At Risk in Alberta 
(ASRD 2011b, COSEWIC 2014). Wolverines typically have large home ranges and are often associated 
with forested habitats that have little human development. No wolverines were detected during the winter 
tracking survey conducted along the pipeline route in January 2014. 

Threats to wolverine populations include habitat loss and fragmentation (COSEWIC 2003). Although forest 
clearing does not necessarily negatively affect wolverine habitat, human presence and activities can alter 
behaviour patterns (e.g., denning, travel and foraging). Indirect effects on wolverine prey bases 
(e.g., ungulate populations) resulting from human developments are also associated with effects to 
wolverine populations (COSEWIC 2003). Resilience of wolverine populations to external pressures may be 
limited by their low densities, large home ranges and low reproductive capacities (Lofroth and Ott 2007).  

Habitat for wolverine is not easily delineated as a set of vegetative parameters and is closely tied to the 
distribution and abundance of food, as well as suitable habitat structures for denning (Petersen 1997). 
Wolverines use a wide assortment of structural stages in their day-to-day life, although mature and old 
forest structural stages are used predominately. Human activity, including roads, infrastructure and 
back-country recreation, can adversely influence wolverine habitat selection (Lofroth and Krebs 2007). 
Some types of human activities that alter forested habitats may not result in adverse changes to wolverine 
habitat (COSEWIC 2003). For example, forest harvest practices that create a landscape matrix of uneven 
aged forest stands can diversify the prey base and maintain or improve wolverine habitat (COSEWIC 2003). 
Conversely, habitat alterations that have adverse effects on prey populations have adverse indirect effects 
on wolverine habitat (COSEWIC 2003).  

A recent tracking study on wolverines in the Chinchaga area of BC and Alberta suggests that wolverines 
are dependent on climax conifer forests during winter because of the buffering effect that mature stands 
with high canopy closure has on snow depth (Wright and Ernst 2004). The severity of potential effects on 
wolverine resulting from habitat loss is reduced by aligning the pipeline route parallel to existing linear 
developments for 77% of its length, and utilizing shared workspace to the extent practicable. Reclamation 
of the Project Footprint with native species will reduce direct and indirect habitat effects on wolverine 
(i.e., regeneration of natural vegetation will provide suitable habitat or resources for potential prey species).  

Change in Movement 
Given that wolverines avoid areas with human development, wolverines are expected to avoid the Project 
during construction activities, and are expected to avoid the compressor station site while it is operational. 

Change in Mortality Risk 
Trapping pressures can be elevated in areas where linear corridors facilitate motorized access. Trapping 
has been an important factor influencing wolverine populations (Lofroth and Ott 2007). Wolverine is 
classified as a furbearer in Alberta and is managed by means of harvest quotas, closures and regulated 
trapping seasons. The Project is located within Fur Management Zone 1, which allows for a basic quota of 
1 wolverine to be harvested from any given Registered Fur Management Area (an area licensed by a 
trapper) (GOA 2014a). Given the need for additional biological information on wolverine to determine the 
 

   
Page 6-95 

 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
age structure, reproductive capability and general population health, AESRD has implemented a carcass 
collection program, which requires licensed trappers to register and submit all wolverine carcasses to the 
local Fish and Wildlife office (GOA 2014a). In an opinion survey conducted in 1996, trappers considered 
the wolverine population to be decreasing throughout Alberta (Petersen 1997). 

Alignment of the pipeline route parallel to existing linear disturbances for 77% of the pipeline length limits 
increased access and potential for increased trapping pressure on wolverine. New access for the Project 
will be minimized given that minor deviations from the existing linear corridors are to facilitate crossing 
watercourses or avoidance of existing infrastructure and by using existing access wherever feasible, and 
temporary access will be decommissioned and reclaimed following construction. Rollback will be used for 
access control management along portions of the pipeline route that is not parallel to existing pipelines and 
roads. Locations for access control will be verified in the field and adjusted as needed by the Environmental 
Inspector(s). Grubbing will be restricted near watercourses, muskeg and other wet areas to facilitate rapid 
recovery of herbaceous and deciduous woody vegetation species in order to provide natural vegetation 
screens that reduce line-of-sight. 

Summary 
The residual effect of the Project on wolverine will be low in magnitude given that the pipeline route is 
parallel to existing linear disturbances for 77%, and mitigation to reduce new access and reclaim disturbed 
areas to natural vegetation will reduce the magnitude of potential residual effects (Table 6.2.26, point [b]). 

Bats 

Change in Habitat 
Forest edges are often associated with elevated bat foraging activity, likely since they provide movement 
corridors or accumulate insects (Hein et al. 2009, Jantzen 2012, Morris et al. 2010). The Project will likely 
create foraging habitat for bat species that forage for insects in the open (e.g., little brown bats), however, 
reduce foraging habitat for clutter-adapted bat species (e.g., northern myotis) that forage in the understory 
of forests (Patriquin and Barclay 2003, Morris et al. 2010). 

The potential adverse effects of the Project on bats are primarily limited to the direct removal or degradation 
of tree roosting habitat. Caves and mines as well as tall rock faces with deep fissures are likely the primary 
hibernation habitat for bats, and may also be used as roosting habitat during the summer (Nagorsen and 
Brigham 1993, Lausen and Barclay 2006). There are no known caves, abandoned mines or steep 
topography with rock faces along the route. Tree-cavities are also extensively used for roosting by several 
bat species, and may be used as hibernacula in warmer climates (Kalcounis-Rüppell et al. 2005, Nagorsen 
and Brigham 1993). Suitable tree-cavity roosting habitat is most often associated with large-diameter 
decaying trees in old mixed or deciduous forests, which contain cavities, crevices or sloughing bark where 
bats can hide (Kalcounis-Rüppell et al. 2005). Clearing of mature forest for Project construction may reduce 
tree roosting habitat for bats. 

Change in Movement 
Bats will likely avoid construction activities and the operating compressor station. Bats may be attracted to 
the pipeline route since bats have been shown to use linear landscape features for movement, which 
provide navigational references and flight corridors for some bat species (Hein et al. 2009, Verboom and 
Huitema 1997). 

Change in Mortality Risk 
There are no habitat features along the route and the proposed compressor station site that are capable of 
supporting hibernating bats (i.e., caves, mines); therefore, the Project will not impact any hibernating bats. 
There is a mortality risk for bats associated with the disruption of tree roosts during construction activities. 

Summary 
The residual effect of the Project on bats will be low in magnitude given the route is in an area of relatively 
intense resource use and the Footprint will be reclaimed to native vegetation and is therefore, not significant 
(Table 6.2.26, point [c]). 

 
   

Page 6-96 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Forest Birds  

Change in Habitat  
Canada warbler (Threatened on Schedule 1 of SARA and by COSEWIC) is selected as representative 
indicators of forest bird species at risk. Canada warblers use a wide range of deciduous, coniferous and 
mixed forests in various seral stages with a well-developed shrub layer and a structurally complex forest 
floor (COSEWIC 2008a). Breeding habitat in Alberta has been described as thick stands of willow and alder 
along streams, dense shrubs in or near water, substantial deciduous undergrowth taller than 1.5 m and a 
ground slope equal or greater than 15 degrees (Semenchuk 1992). 

Clearing for Project construction and maintenance will affect forest birds as a result of habitat loss or 
alteration, fragmentation and changes in habitat connectivity. Habitat alteration as a result of forest clearing 
can result in losses and/or shifts in forest bird population dynamics. Short and long-term declines of various 
species of forest adapted bird have been attributed to reduction and fragmentation of forest cover (Lynch 
and Whigham 1984, Sekercioglu et al. 2002, Schmiegelow and Monkkonen 2002). Construction and 
operation of the pipeline will create new forest clearing, increase the existing corridor width where existing 
rights-of-way are paralleled, remove potential nesting and perch trees, and require ongoing clearing as part 
of vegetation management during operation. This will result in the long-term conversion of forest habitat to 
earlier seral stages (forb and shrub stages) until the pipeline is decommissioned and disturbed areas are 
reclaimed.  

Construction of the pipeline will result in clearing of approximately 31.2 ha of mature forested areas. The 
area of habitat loss or alteration potentially affecting forest birds is reduced by routing the pipeline along 
existing linear corridors (i.e., pipeline rights-of-way, road, seismic line) for 77% of its length, utilizing 
workspace on existing adjacent disturbances (21% of the Footprint overlaps existing anthropogenic 
disturbance), reclaiming the Project Footprint including construction and reclamation methods that 
accelerate woody vegetation regeneration (e.g., limited grubbing and grading), and limiting vegetation 
management along the pipeline right-of-way during operation. 

Change in Movement 
Narrow corridors may act as barriers or filters to boreal forest birds, although they do not appear to create 
large zones of influence with reduced bird use (Bayne et al. 2005). Research conducted by Fleming and 
Schmiegelow (2002) on bird willingness to cross varying widths of pipeline rights-of-way (15-16 m, 22-24 m, 
32-34 m, and >50 m) in the boreal forest of Alberta was inconclusive due to low sample sizes. However, 
several species did show an unwillingness to cross even narrow corridors. The same study found that bird 
community structure was affected by the presence of a right-of-way and nests adjacent to a narrow 
right-of-way experienced lower predation rates compared to a wider right-of-way. Desrochers and Hannon 
(1997) found that gaps less than 30 m in width had little effect on bird movements, though wider gaps 
constrained movement for specific species. That study also found forested detours strongly facilitated 
movements around gaps. St. Clair et al. (1998) reported that birds use forested detours to move across 
gaps where they are available. Canada warbler may be affected by habitat fragmentation and changes in 
habitat connectivity given its preference for mature forest habitat. 

The width of the pipeline right-of-way is 32 m, plus additional temporary workspace of varying width where 
required. Routing the pipeline along existing linear disturbances (i.e., pipeline rights-of-way) for 77% of its 
length, limiting vegetation management along the pipeline right-of-way to the extent feasible, and 
completing reclamation as soon after construction as possible is expected to reduce potential changes to 
forest bird habitat connectivity by minimizing fragmentation of residual forest patches.  

Change in Mortality Risk 
Construction activities are along the pipeline route are scheduled outside of the migratory bird nesting 
period (May 1 to August 10) and the federal RAP of May 1 to July 31 for Canada warbler nests (Gregoire 
pers. comm.), and a nest sweep is planned prior to clearing the proposed compressor station site during 
the migratory bird RAP. Non-intrusive methods will be used to conduct an area search for evidence of 
nesting (e.g., presence of singing birds, territorial males, alarm calls, distraction displays). In the event an 
active nest is found, it will be subject to site-specific mitigation measures (i.e., clearly marked protective 
buffer around the nest and/or non-intrusive monitoring). 

 
   

Page 6-97 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Summary 
Since scheduling of construction activities along the pipeline route is outside the migratory bird nesting 
period, and a nest sweep is planned prior to clearing the compressor station site, the probability that forest 
bird nests will be affected by construction activities is low. However, the combined effect of the Project on 
the forest birds is considered a high probability since the Project will affect habitat. With the implementation 
of applicable mitigation measures, the residual effect will be of low magnitude and therefore not significant 
(Table 6.2.26 point [d]). 

Olive-sided Flycatcher 

Change in Habitat  
Olive-sided flycatcher (Threatened on Schedule 1 of SARA and by COSEWIC) is typically associated with 
forest openings (e.g., fens, bogs, swamps, logged areas, burned forest), forest edges (e.g., near wetlands) 
or open forest stands. Tall trees or snags are essential for foraging (perches) and nesting. In the boreal 
forest of western Canada, suitable olive-sided flycatcher habitat is more likely to occur in or near wetlands 
and in young forest associated with burns and clear-cuts that contain residual live trees (COSEWIC 2007b). 

Construction of the pipeline will result in clearing of approximately 31.2 ha of mature forested areas and 
77.6 ha of regenerating forested areas The area of habitat loss or alteration potentially affecting olive-sided 
flycatcher is reduced by routing the pipeline along existing linear corridors (i.e., pipeline rights-of-way and 
road) for 77% of its length, utilizing workspace on existing adjacent disturbances (21% of the Footprint 
overlaps existing anthropogenic disturbance), reclaiming the Project Footprint including construction and 
reclamation methods that accelerate woody vegetation regeneration (e.g., limited grubbing and grading), 
and limiting vegetation management along the pipeline right-of-way during operation.  

Change in Movement 
Studies have linked olive-sided flycatcher with highly fragmented landscapes, suggesting that they may 
prefer edge habitat (COSEWIC 2007b). Forest openings created by the pipeline are unlikely to affect 
movement for olive-sided flycatcher.  

The width of the pipeline right-of-way is 32 m, plus additional temporary workspace of varying width where 
required. Routing the pipeline along existing linear disturbances (i.e., pipeline rights-of-way) for 77% of its 
length, limiting vegetation management along the pipeline right-of-way to the extent feasible, and 
completing reclamation as soon after construction as possible is expected to reduce potential changes to 
olive-sided flycatcher habitat connectivity by minimizing fragmentation of residual forest patches.  

Change in Mortality Risk 
Construction activities along the pipeline route are scheduled outside of the migratory bird RAP (May 1 to 
August 10) (Gregoire pers. comm.) and the federal RAP of May 1 to August 31 for olive-sided flycatcher 
nests (Environment Canada 2011a), and a nest sweep is planned prior to clearing the proposed compressor 
station site during the migratory bird RAP. 

Summary 
Since construction activities for the pipeline route are scheduled outside of the nesting period and a nest 
sweep is planned prior to clearing the compressor station site during the migratory bird RAP, the probability 
that olive-sided flycatcher nests will be affected by construction activities is low, however, the probability 
that habitat will be altered is high. With the implementation of applicable mitigation measures, the residual 
effect will be of low magnitude and therefore, not significant (Table 6.2.26, point [e]). 

Rusty Blackbird 

Change in Habitat  
Rusty blackbird is a species reliant on boreal forest wetland habitats that have potential to occur in the 
Project area is listed under Schedule 1 of the SARA and by COSEWIC. Habitat requirements for this 
species (e.g., shallow, open-water forested wetlands) is expected to be affected by the construction and 

 
   

Page 6-98 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
operation of the pipeline as a result of changes in habitat through vegetation clearing and potentially 
alteration of water quality and wetland function. Horned grebe and yellow rail are other wetland birds that 
are listed under Schedule 1 of SARA and/or by COSEWIC and rely on wetland habitats. Although these 
species have different habitat requirements (e.g., horned grebe breeding ponds must contain areas of open 
water and beds of emergent vegetation; are found in wetlands dominated by sedges, grasses and rushes 
where there is little or no standing water [generally 0-12 cm water depth] and where the substrate remains 
saturated throughout the summer), the construction and operation of the pipeline is expected to similarly 
affect these species as a result of changes in habitat through vegetation clearing and potentially alteration 
of water quality and wetland function. 

The pipeline route crosses approximately 20 km of wetland habitat. There are no wetlands at the proposed 
compressor station site. The effects of construction of a pipeline right-of-way on wetland vegetation and 
bird communities were investigated up to two years following construction by Santillo (1993). Results 
showed that: there was a fairly high similarity of species composition and structure among study wetlands 
two years after construction, regardless of wetland type, except for a wetland with standing water; and no 
new bird species were introduced as a result of the different habitat provided by the construction right-of-
way. 

Change in Movement 
Since clearing, construction and clean-up activities along the pipeline route are scheduled to occur outside 
of the migratory bird RAP (i.e., May 1 to August 10) (Gregoire pers. comm), Project construction activities 
are not expected to affect wetland bird movement.  

Change in Mortality Risk 
Construction activities are scheduled along the pipeline route outside of the migratory bird RAP (May 1 to 
August 10) (Gregoire pers. comm.) and will avoid the federal RAP of May 1 to July 31 for rusty blackbird 
(Environment Canada 2011a). There is no potential habitat for rusty blackbirds at the compressor station 
site given that there is no wetland habitat at the compressor station site. 

Summary 
Since construction activities along the pipeline route are scheduled outside of the nesting period, the 
probability that wetland bird nests will be affected by construction activities is low, however, the probability 
that wetland habitat will be altered is high. With the implementation of the proposed mitigation measures, 
the residual effect is considered to be of low magnitude and reversible in the long-term and therefore, not 
significant (Table 6.2.26, point [f]). 

Western Toad 

Change in Habitat  
Western toads (Special Concern on Schedule 1 of SARA and by COSEWIC) require wetland and upland 
habitats, and movement corridors between these areas (COSEWIC 2012). Western toads breed in a variety 
of natural and artificial aquatic habitats, including ponds, stream edges and the shallow margins of lakes, 
as well as in ditches and road ruts (COSEWIC 2012). Outside of the breeding season, adult toads disperse 
into forested areas, wet shrub lands, and wetland habitats not necessarily used for egg laying 
(COSEWIC 2012). Western toads do not appear to be dependent upon mature or old-growth forest and 
favour dense shrub cover, which provides protection from desiccation and predation (COSEWIC 2012).  

Three adult western toads (Special Concern on Schedule 1 of SARA and by COSEWIC) were observed 
near KP 14.8, KP 35.6 and KP 35.8 (see Appendix 8 for details). During the wildlife field work conducted in 
June 2013, no amphibian eggs or tadpoles were observed, and no western toad breeding ponds were 
identified. Suitable breeding habitat occurs at wetlands with open water along the Project. The Project may 
potentially result in the alteration of approximately 20.3 km of wetland habitat. 

Change in Movement 
Browne and Paszkowski (2010) found that radio tracked western toads in boreal forests of north-central 
Alberta traveled a distance, on average, of about 1,086 m between breeding and hibernation sites 
 

   
Page 6-99 

 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
(range = 146 m to 1,936 m). Western toads have been found to occasionally move several kilometres in a 
directional manner (Davis 2000). Since western toads move overland by climbing and crawling 
(COSEWIC 2012), their movements are potentially affected by anthropogenic disturbances such as 
facilities, fences (including silt or snow fences), soil berms, ditches or deep ruts. Linear corridors 
(e.g., pipeline rights-of-way) are unlikely to affect toad movement. Clearing and construction of the pipeline 
route is scheduled for the winter, when western toads are inactive.  

Change in Mortality Risk 
Western toad response to habitat alteration is often expressed as increased mortality risk associated with 
predation (e.g., cleared areas may support higher populations of predators), low juvenile recruitment in 
artificial breeding ponds that dry before metamorphosis, and desiccation (small metamorphs are particularly 
vulnerable to desiccation when trapped in road ruts or where riparian vegetation is disturbed) 
(COSEWIC 2012).  

Western toads overwinter in a variety of sites, including banks of spring seeps and streams, willow clumps, 
the base of trees and small mammal burrows (COSEWIC 2012). In the eastern part of their range 
(north-central Alberta), western toads use a variety of habitats for hibernation, including marshes, peat 
wetlands, dry and wet meadows, deciduous and coniferous forest, wet shrubland, and burned forests 
(Browne and Paszkowski 2010). Coniferous forests appear to be selected in disproportion to their 
availability (Browne and Paszkowski 2010). Within these areas, hibernation often occurs within tunnels and 
crevices, such as those created by small mammals (e.g., red squirrels) and decaying root masses (Browne 
and Paszkowski 2010). Western toads are vulnerable during hibernation in the winter to activities that cause 
soil disturbance. Soil compaction due to machinery and vehicles could decrease toads’ ability to burrow 
into the soil and, therefore, potentially increase mortality due to desiccation or predation (Russell and 
Bauer 2000). Proposed mitigation measures (e.g., minimizing grading, grubbing and clearing to the extent 
feasible, implementing measures such as packing snow or using mats to avoid excessive soil compaction 
on the Project Footprint, particularly in proximity to wetlands and watercourses) are expected to reduce the 
potential residual effect of the Project on western toad mortality risk as a result of hibernation habitat 
disturbance.  

Summary 
As it is difficult to know the terrestrial stage of amphibians during Project construction, confidence is 
considered low; however, with the implementation of planned mitigation measures, the combined effect of 
the Project on the western toad is of low magnitude and considered to be not significant (Table 6.2.26, 
point [g]). 

6.2.11.5 Summary 

As identified in Table 6.2.26, the residual effect on woodland caribou is considered to be significant given 
that the existing level of disturbance within the ESAR is at 81% of the range (i.e., beyond the Environment 
Canada’s target of 35%), and despite the fact the incremental disturbance of the Project is small (<0.1% 
incremental direct disturbance to the ESAR).The residual effect on wolverine, bats, olive-sided flycatcher, 
rusty blackbird and western toad will be not significant.  

6.2.12 Human Occupancy and Resource Use 

6.2.12.1 Spatial Boundaries 

The spatial boundaries used in the effects assessment on human occupancy and resource use 
(Figure 5.10) considered one or more of the following areas: 

• a Footprint Study Area (as defined in Section 1.4);  

• a HORU LSA; and  

• a HORU RSA.  

 
   

Page 6-100 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
The spatial boundary of the HORU LSA is defined by a 2 km wide band centred on the construction right-of-
way (i.e., 1 km on both sides of the construction right-of-way centre line). The HORU LSA was established 
to provide adequate consideration to existing land and resource uses (e.g., trapping, hunting, fishing, 
protected areas) in the Project area.  

The spatial boundary for the HORU RSA includes the RSA boundaries of water quality and quantity, fish 
and fish habitat, wetlands, vegetation, wildlife and wildlife habitat and heritage resources. The HORU RSA 
was selected to reflect the general setting and describe resource use related elements that could be 
indirectly affected by the Project (e.g., consumptive and non-consumptive recreation, hunting, fishing, 
trapping, guide outfitting).  

6.2.12.2 Human Occupancy and Resource Use Context 

The Project is located on Crown land in the Green Area of northeast Alberta within the RM of Wood Buffalo 
and Lac La Biche County. The RM of Wood Buffalo MDP and Lac La Biche County MDP provide direction 
on managing high levels of anticipated economic development while also considering the states of the 
natural environment (ISL Engineering and Land Services 2013, RM of Wood Buffalo 2011). Provincial 
government policies, as described in the LARP, include balancing economic, social and environmental 
objectives while considering cumulative effects (Government of Alberta 2012a). Conflicts between the land 
use objectives of the plans and the Project were not identified. 

The Project is not located in any urban areas, I.R.s, Métis settlements, natural areas, wildlife sanctuaries, 
wilderness areas, wildland parks, provincial recreation areas, national parks, provincial parks, heritage 
rangeland or ecological reserves (ATPR 2013). The closest park and recreation area to the Project location 
is the Grand Rapids Wildland Provincial Park, located 16.7 km northeast of KP 36.3. The nearest recreation 
area is the Mariana Lake Forest Recreation Area, located 2.2 km south west of KP 2.0. 

Land users in the HORU LSA and HORU RSA include forestry operations, oil and gas development, 
recreationalists (e.g., kayakers and canoeists), guide outfitters, hunters, fishers, trappers and Aboriginal 
communities. 

6.2.12.3 Potential Effects, Mitigation Measures and Potential Residual Effects 

Potential effects on human occupancy and resource use associated with the construction and operations 
of the Project were identified by the assessment team and are listed in Table 6.2.27 and include human 
habitation, outdoor recreational use, parks and protected areas, aesthetic attributes, agricultural use, 
forestry, Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal hunting, fishing, guide outfitting and trapping, and domestic water 
supply. 

The assessment of potential effects on human occupancy and resource use has been conducted 
considering all Project components in an integrated manner (e.g., pipeline, compressor station), as many 
potential human use effects are experienced in a combined manner, and cannot be meaningfully 
disaggregated by Project components.  

A summary of mitigation measures to reduce the severity of potential effects of the Project on human 
occupancy and resource use are presented in Table 6.2.27. These measures were developed in 
accordance with NGTL standards and several industry and provincial regulatory guidelines including AENV 
(1988, 1994a), Government of Alberta (2013a) and CAPP (1999). In addition, these measures have been 
considered acceptable by the NEB for past pipeline projects by NGTL (NEB 2010a,b,c).  

Effects of the Project on human habitation were considered for inclusion in this assessment, but were 
scoped out due to the limited anticipated Project-related interaction. The nearest community is the urban 
service area of Fort McMurray, located approximately 83.6 km north of KP 0.3. Potential effects on 
navigation and navigation safety for land and resource users are discussed in Section 6.2.18. 

  

 
   

Page 6-101 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
TABLE 6.2.27 

 
POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND RESIDUAL  

EFFECTS OF PROJECT CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS ON HORU 

Potential Effect Component 
Spatial 

Boundary1 Key Recommendations/Mitigation Measures1 
Potential Residual 

Effects 
1. Physical 

disturbance of 
outdoor 
recreation use 
areas  

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

LSA • Ensure affected stakeholders are aware of Project activities 
[Section 5.0]. 

• Discourage unauthorized public vehicle access along the right-of-way 
during construction through the use of signs [Section 8.1] 

• Restrict all construction activities to the approved, surveyed right-of-way 
and facility site, and approved temporary workspace, existing roads and 
shoo-flies. All construction traffic will adhere to safety and road closure 
regulations [Section 8.1]. 

• Implement measures related to sensory disturbance in point 2 of this 
Table. 

• Decrease in 
quality of outdoor 
recreational 
experience of 
resource users 
during construction 
and site-specific 
maintenance. 

2. Sensory 
disturbance for 
land and 
resource users 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

RSA • Ensure affected stakeholders are aware of Project activities to prevent 
or reduce impacts to their operations or activities [Section 5.0]. 

• Provide Aboriginal Communities with the proposed construction 
schedule and Project maps [Section 5.0]. 

• Restrict all construction activities to the approved, surveyed right-of-way 
and facility site, and approved temporary workspace, existing roads and 
shoo-flies. All construction traffic will adhere to safety and road closure 
regulations [Section 8.1]. 

• Ensure that noise abatement equipment on machinery is in good 
working order [Section 8.1]. 

• Reduce idling of equipment, where possible [Section 8.1]. 
• The Contractor will ensure equipment is well-maintained and free of 

fluid leaks [Section 8.1]. 
• Where practical and applicable, use multi-passenger vehicles for the 

transport of crews to and from job sites [Section 8.1]. 

• Sensory 
disturbance for 
land and resource 
users.  

• Increase in air 
emissions during 
construction, 
maintenance and 
operations(Section
 6.2.4). 

• Increase in 
nuisance noise 
during construction 
and maintenance 
(Section 6.2.6). 

• Disruption of daily 
activities of local 
residents and land 
users during 
construction 
(Section 6.2.16). 

3. Alteration of 
viewsheds 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

RSA • Inform all appropriate federal and provincial resource agencies and 
interested municipal officials of the Project developments as warranted 
[Section 5.0]. 

• Restrict all construction activities to the approved surveyed Project 
construction site, and approved temporary workspace, existing roads 
and approved shoo-flies. All construction traffic will adhere to safety and 
road closure regulations [Section 8.1]. 

• Remove and reclaim any temporary access created for the Project 
[Section 8.8]. 

• Alteration of 
viewsheds.  

4. Reduction of 
land base for 
timber harvest 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

Footprint • Inform all appropriate federal and provincial resource agencies and 
interested municipal officials of the Project developments as warranted 
[Section 5.0]. 

• Restrict all construction activities to the approved surveyed right-of-way, 
and approved temporary workspace, existing roads and approved 
shoo-flies. All construction traffic will adhere to safety and road closure 
regulations [Section 8.1]. 

• Salvage and deck timber as denoted in the Timber Salvage Plan 
[Section 8.2]. 

• Do not bulldoze salvageable timber [Section 8.2]. 
• Implement measures outlined in vegetation Section 6.2.9.  

• Loss of forestry 
resources and 
reduction of land 
base for timber 
harvest. 

5. Disruption of 
mineral 
tenures, 
aggregate 
resources and 
oil and gas 
activities 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

Footprint • Ensure affected stakeholders are aware of Project activities to prevent 
or reduce impacts to their operations or activities [Section 5.0]. 

• Mark and locate all foreign lines and cables using one-call services 
before the start of construction to ensure the safety of the workers and 
public [Section 6.0]. 

• No residual effect 
identified. 

 
   

Page 6-102 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.27  Cont'd 

Potential Effect Component 
Spatial 

Boundary1 Key Recommendations/Mitigation Measures1 
Potential Residual 

Effects 
6. Disruption of 

hunting, 
fishing, 
trapping and 
outfitting 
activities 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

RSA • Inform all appropriate federal and provincial resource agencies as well 
as interested municipal officials of the Project developments, as 
warranted [Section 5.0]. 

• Notify registered trappers at least two weeks prior to construction 
[Section 5.0]. 

• Restrict all construction activities to the approved surveyed Project 
construction site, and approved temporary workspace, existing roads 
and approved shoo-flies. All construction traffic will adhere to safety and 
road closure regulations [Section 8.1]. 

• Discourage unauthorized public vehicle access along the right-of-way 
during construction through the use of signs [Section 8.1]. 

• Locations for access control (i.e., not parallel to existing pipelines and 
roads) will be verified in the field and adjusted as needed by the 
Environmental Inspector(s), in discussion with AESRD [Table 1].  

• In the event that beaver dams or lodges will be disturbed, provide 
notification or obtain the necessary provincial permits prior to 
commencing activities. Engage the registered trapper(s) [Section 8.4]. 

• Implement mitigation measures related to fish and fish habitat in 
Section 6.2.7 and wildlife and wildlife habitat in Section 6.2.10. 

• Remove bar ditch ramps and reclaim all temporary access trails and 
shoo-flies to stable conditions. Recontour to pre-construction conditions 
and seed accordingly [Section 8.8]. 

• Disruption of 
outfitting trapping, 
hunting and fishing 
activities land 
users during 
construction.  

 

Notes: 1 LSA = HORU LSA; RSA = HORU RSA 
 2 Detailed mitigation measures are outlined in the Project-specific EPP in Appendix 1. 
 

6.2.12.4 Significance Evaluation of Potential Residual Effects 

A qualitative assessment was considered the most appropriate method to evaluate the significance of 
potential residual effects on human occupancy and resource use, due to the lack of quantitative data and 
accepted standards, guidelines and social thresholds. This qualitative assessment relied on available 
research, literature and the professional judgement of the assessment team.  

Table 6.2.28 provides a summary of the significance evaluation of potential residual socio-economic effects 
of the construction and operations of the Project on human occupancy and resource use. The rationale 
used to evaluate the significance of each of the residual socio-economic effects is provided below. An 
evaluation of significance is not required for those potential effects where no residual effect is identified. All 
assessment criteria were considered when determining the significance of each residual effect, but the 
most influential assessment criteria were reversibility, magnitude and probability. 

TABLE 6.2.28 
 

CHARACTERIZATION OF POTENTIAL RESIDUAL  
EFFECTS FOR EVALUATION OF SIGNIFICANCE – HORU 

Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
a. Decrease in quality of 

the outdoor 
recreational 
experience of 
resource users during 
construction and site-
specific maintenance 

Impact balance: Negative The quality of the outdoor recreational experience of Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal 
resource users during construction and site-specific maintenance can decrease. 

Spatial boundary: HORU RSA Noise and air emissions caused by site-specific maintenance can extend into the HORU 
LSA and HORU RSA. 

Duration: Short-term The event causing the decrease in quality of the outdoor recreational experience is 
completed in the construction phase or within any 1 year during operations. 

 

 
   

Page 6-103 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.28  Cont’d 

Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
a. Decrease in quality of 

the outdoor 
recreational 
experience of 
resource users during 
construction and site-
specific maintenance 
(cont’d) 

Frequency: Isolated to periodic The event causing the decrease in quality of the outdoor recreational experience is 
confined to the construction phase and can occur intermittently but repeatedly over the 
assessment period. 

Reversibility: Short-term Decrease in quality of the outdoor recreational experience is limited to the construction 
phase and site-specific maintenance will be completed within any 1 year during 
operations 

Magnitude: Low Changes may be detectable, but will primarily be an inconvenience or nuisance. 
Probability: High Project construction activity will occur in areas used for outdoor recreation and site-

specific maintenance activities will be required as part of regular operations and will 
involve the use of heavy and light equipment and vehicles. 

Confidence: High The determination of significance is based on a good understanding of cause-effect 
relationships using data pertinent to the Project area. 

Significance: Not significant  With the implementation of the mitigation measures outlined in Table 6.2.27, the 
residual effect of decrease in quality of the outdoor recreational experience is 
considered not significant. 

b. Sensory disturbance 
for land and resource 
users 

Impact balance: Negative Construction activities, operation of the compressor station and site-specific 
maintenance along the pipeline may cause socio-economic effects due to sensory 
disturbance. 

Spatial boundary: HORU RSA Sensory disturbances for land and resource users from construction and site-specific 
maintenance may extend into the HORU LSA and HORU RSA.  

Duration: Long-term The event causing the sensory disturbance will occur during construction and extend for 
the life of the Project. 

Frequency: Continuous Though construction activities are isolated, sensory disturbance from the proposed 
compressor station will occur continually over the assessment period. 

Reversibility: Long-term The sensory disturbance will occur during construction and operations and will extend 
beyond the first two years of the operations phase. 

Magnitude: Low The proposed mitigation measures will effectively reduce the potential residual effect to 
an inconvenience or nuisance. 

Probability: High Project activity will occur in land and resource use areas. 
Confidence: High The determination of significance is based on a good understanding of cause-effect 

relationships using data pertinent to the Project area. 
Significance: Not significant  With the implementation of the mitigation measures outlined in Table 6.2.27, the 

residual effect of sensory disturbance for land and resource users is considered not 
significant. 

c. Alteration of 
viewsheds 

Impact balance: Negative The visual quality of the landscape, adjacent to the construction right-of-way, may be 
adversely affected by the Project. 

Spatial boundary: HORU RSA The change in visual quality will extend into the HORU LSA.  
Duration: Short-term The event causing the alteration of viewsheds will occur during the construction phase. 
Frequency: Isolated The event causing the alteration of viewsheds is confined to the construction phase. 
Reversibility: Long-term The alteration of viewsheds due to the Project will extend throughout the operations 

phase. 
Magnitude: Low The implementation of the proposed mitigation measures, along with the remote 

location of the Project and the lack of permanent residents, will effectively reduce the 
potential residual effects on the viewshed to an inconvenience or nuisance. 

Probability: High The Project will involve clearing and construction activities and new above ground 
features will be built. 

Confidence: High The determination of significance is based on a good understanding of cause-effect 
relationships using data pertinent to the Project area. 

Significance: Not significant  With the implementation of the mitigation measures outlined in Table 6.2.27, the 
residual effect of an alteration of viewsheds is considered not significant. 

d. Reduction in forestry 
resources 

Impact balance: Negative There may be loss of forestry resources and a reduction of land base for timber harvest 
as a result of construction and operations of the Project. 

Spatial boundary: Footprint The loss of forestry resources would occur along the Footprint. 
Duration: Short-term The event causing the loss of forestry resources occurs during the construction phase. 
Frequency: Isolated The event causing the loss of forestry resources is confined to the construction phase. 
Reversibility: Long-term The loss of forestry resources will extend throughout the operations phase. 
Magnitude: Low The proposed mitigation measures will effectively reduce the potential residual effects 

on forestry resources to an inconvenience or nuisance. 
Probability: High The Project will result in the reduction in loss of forestry resources and reduction of land 

base for timber. 

 
   

Page 6-104 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.28  Cont’d 

Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
d. Reduction in forestry 

resources (cont’d) 
Confidence: High The determination of significance is based on a good understanding of cause-effect 

relationships using data pertinent to the Project area. 
Significance: Not significant  With the implementation of the mitigation measures outlined in Table 6.2.27, the loss of 

forestry resources is considered not significant. 
e. Disruption of outfitting 

trapping, hunting and 
fishing activities of 
Aboriginal and non-
Aboriginal land users 
during construction.  

Impact balance: Negative Outfitting trapping, hunting and fishing activities of Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal land 
users may be disrupted during Project construction. 

Spatial boundary: HORU RSA The proposed Project may displace outfitting, trapping, hunting and fishing activities to 
areas extending into the HORU RSA. 

Duration: Short-term The event causing the disruption of outfitting, trapping, hunting and fishing activities will 
occur during the construction phase. 

Frequency: Isolated The event causing the disruption of outfitting, trapping, hunting and fishing activities is 
confined to the construction phase.  

Reversibility: Short-term The disruption of outfitting, trapping, hunting and fishing activities is limited to the 
construction phase. 

Magnitude: Medium The proposed mitigation will effectively reduce the potential residual effect to a 
moderate modification of the socio-economic environment. 

Probability: High Construction activities will overlap with hunting and fishing seasons and trapping 
activities. 

Confidence: High The determination of significance is based on a good understanding of cause-effect 
relationships using data pertinent to the Project area. 

Significance: Not significant  With the implementation of the mitigation measures, the residual effect of a disruption of 
outfitting, trapping, hunting and fishing activities is considered not significant. 

f. Combined effects on 
human occupancy and 
resource use 

Impact balance: Negative Project construction and site-specific maintenance activities may occur simultaneously 
to affect human occupancy and resource use. 

Spatial boundary: HORU RSA The Project may result in combined effects extending into the HORU RSA. 
Duration: Long-term The events causing combined effects could occur during construction and operations. 
Frequency: Continuous The events causing combined effects may cause continually over the assessment 

period. 
Reversibility: Long-term The combined effects will extend beyond the first 2 years of the operations phase. 
Magnitude: Medium The proposed mitigation measures reduce the combined effects to a moderate 

modification of the socio-economic environment. 
Probability: High It is likely that the Project will result in combined effects. 
Confidence: Moderate The determination of significance is based on a good understanding of cause-effect 

relationships but it is challenging to predict if potential residual effects will overlap in a 
particular area resulting in a combined effect. 

Significance: Not significant  With the implementation of the mitigation measures outlined in Table 6.2.27, combined 
effects on human occupancy and resources use are considered not significant. 

 

Decrease in Quality of the Outdoor Recreational Experience of Resource Users During 
Construction and Operations 

Construction 
The outdoor recreational experiences of Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal resource users, such as hiking, 
camping, wildlife viewing, paddling (canoeing and kayaking), boating, hunting and fishing may be affected 
by the physical disturbance of outdoor recreation areas during pipeline construction. One campground is 
located in the HORU LSA near Mariana Lake, and the area in the Footprint and HORU LSA could potentially 
be used for outdoor activities. Nuisance air emissions, noise and visual effects may also occur during the 
construction of the Project and affect all land users living, working or recreating in the vicinity of the final 
right-of-way. Aesthetic disturbances are assessed below under the alteration of viewsheds effect. 

The impact balance of this residual effect is considered negative; however, mitigation measures designed 
to inform all appropriate federal and provincial resource agencies and interested municipal officials of the 
Project developments will lessen the effect, since users will have the opportunity to choose an alternate 
location for recreational pursuits. Given the relatively short construction period at any given location, use of 
well-maintained equipment and limiting idling of equipment, the residual effect is considered to be of low 
magnitude and reversible in the short-term. 

 
   

Page 6-105 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Operations 
The outdoor recreational experience of resource users may be affected by the operations phase of the 
Project. Use of outdoor water and land based recreation areas, such as waterways, may be disturbed or 
disrupted by site-specific maintenance (e.g., aerial patrols, vegetation management, integrity digs) which 
will occur periodically throughout the operations phase of the Project. These activities will involve workers 
and equipment that could result in nuisance air and noise emissions. 

The impact balance of this residual effect is considered negative. Where the pipeline route parallels existing 
linear disturbance (77%) these activities will be comparable to existing operations and not considered to be 
a change. The effect is considered potentially negative only in areas where the pipeline route deviates from 
existing right-of-way. The magnitude of this effect will be reduced by restricting all construction activities to 
the approved surveyed right-of-way, and approved temporary workspace, existing roads and approved 
shoo-flies. The residual effect is reversible in the short-term since site-specific maintenance activities will 
be completed within any one year of operations. As a result, the effect is considered to be not significant 
(Table 6.2.28, point [a]). 

Sensory Disturbance for Land and Resource Users  
Nuisance air emissions and noise will occur during the construction and operation of the compressor station 
of the Project and may at times affect land and resource users in the vicinity of Project. Possible effects 
may include air emissions (including odours) and noise from construction equipment and vehicles, and dust 
from vehicles. Also, equipment, areas of land disturbance, and the activity of construction workers will be 
visible to nearby land and resource users during periods of construction and site-specific maintenance. 
There may also be periods of night lighting around construction sites. The proposed Leismer East 
Compressor Station will increase noise in the area and will produce GHG emissions through combustion 
of sweet natural gas to drive the compressor turbines during operations. Consequently, the visual quality 
of the landscape adjacent to the right-of-way or other construction areas may be adversely affected by the 
Project over the short-term related to construction or maintenance activity. 

The low population density in areas of the Project will result in less people being potentially affected, due 
to the decreased presence of human receptors. The implementation of the proposed mitigation measures 
will reduce the effects of noise and air emissions (including odours) on land users. Noise and air emissions 
levels will adhere to municipal by-laws and stay within regulated levels (Appendix 3 and 4, respectively). 
Nuisance air and noise emissions will also occur for isolated periods of time at specific locations during 
periodic site-specific maintenance activities (e.g., aerial patrols, vegetation management, integrity digs) 
during the operations phase of the Project. Operations of the proposed Leismer East Compressor Station 
will occur continuously for the life of the Project. A wide range of mitigation measures will be in place to 
manage air and noise effects (Appendix 1). These include: restricting all construction activities to the 
approved surveyed right-of-way, and approved temporary workspace, existing roads and approved 
shoo-flies; adhering to safety and road closure regulations; and achieving dust control on existing access 
roads through the application of calcium chloride (or equivalent) or water. 

However, even with the implementation of mitigation measures, some residual sensory disturbance is 
anticipated. The impact balance of this residual effect is considered negative, as it will likely be undesirable 
for nearby land and resource users. Given the successful implementation of the mitigation measures, the 
residual effect of nuisance air emissions, noise and visual disruption is deemed low in magnitude, as it 
would be limited to a nuisance or inconvenience. The effect would be long-term in duration and continuous 
in frequency, as sensory disturbance will continue throughout the assessment period. The potential effect 
is considered reversible in the long-term, however, with the implementation of proposed mitigation measure 
it is considered not significant (Table 6.2.28, point [b]). 

Alteration of Viewsheds 
The Project is anticipated to have longer term visual effects related to the presence of the new pipeline 
right-of-way in select areas and new above ground structures at the compressor station site location during 
operations. This may affect the quality or experience of certain viewsheds for some land and resource 
users. The impact balance of this residual effect is considered negative, but low in magnitude as it is 
primarily considered a nuisance or inconvenience. 

 
   

Page 6-106 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Potential long-term visual effects of new pipeline right-of-way will be reduced by paralleling an existing 
linear disturbance for a majority (77%) of the route. Mitigation measures include reducing access (human 
and predator) along the pipeline right-of-way following construction (e.g., during final clean-up). Measures 
may include using woody debris as rollback, mounding, placing boulders across the right-of-way, installing 
gates and signs, and planting trees or shrubs at select locations along the pipeline right-of-way. The 
locations of site-specific measures will be determined based on consultation with the appropriate regulatory 
authority. 

The construction of the proposed Leismer East Compressor Station will, however, result in a new long-term 
structure on the landscape. While the design of the compressor station is not finalized, the proposed 
compressor station has been sited approximately 1 km east of Highway 63 and road users will not be 
impacted.  

The overall residual visual effect of the pipeline route and proposed compressor station is considered to be 
reversible in the long-term, as any new cleared right-of-way and altered or new above ground structures 
will be present throughout operations and until the Project is decommissioned and abandoned. However, 
the magnitude of residual visual effects is considered low. While Project features will be detectable from 
certain vantage points in the HORU LSA and HORU RSA, the effect is considered to be a nuisance or 
inconvenience particularly given the decreased presence of human receptors. Also, the pipeline 
right-of-way has not been finalized, and a key principle of route finalization is the minimization of new 
right-of-way which will inherently reduce incremental visual effects. The duration of the potential residual 
effect is considered short-term, and the frequency is considered isolated, as the event causing the 
alterations in viewshed (i.e., clearing of right-of-way and development of new above ground facility 
structures) occurs during the construction phase. Therefore, the alteration of viewsheds is considered not 
significant (Table 6.2.28, point [c]).  

Reduction of Land Base for Timber Harvest 
The pipeline route parallels existing rights-of-way to the extent practical. However, approximately 8.3 km 
(33%) of new right-of-way is planned. Some of the new right-of-way and access road (approximately 259 m 
long and 7 m wide) may be constructed on forested land in the FMU A-14 and L-3, operated by AlPac. The 
Project Footprint (including the pipeline, compressor station and access road) is located on approximately 
29.6 ha (21%) of previously cleared land (e.g., existing cutlines, pipeline rights-of-way and roads) and 
71.6 ha (50%) of regenerating burn and the reduction of land base for potential timber harvest is considered 
minimal.  

The construction of the Project will involve clearing of forested areas and a long-term reduction in timber 
supply. Salvageable timber removal from the right-of-way will result in a loss of land available for future 
harvesting. Merchantable timber removed will be transported to conversion facilities or other end users 
where feasible.  

During the operations phase, the pipeline route will remain as a long-term linear disturbance. Native tree 
species will not be replanted on the right-of-way as pipelines are actively managed to prevent tree 
regeneration, and tree species cannot be replanted where permanent infrastructure is located (Braun and 
Hanus 2005).  

Forestry remains an important contributor to the local economy in the HORU RSA. Construction of the 
Project may have an effect on forest harvesting operations as forest companies may have to alter 
harvesting plans to accommodate changes in the forested land base due to the Project. During construction, 
temporary access roads managed by forest licensees may be used to transport Project equipment and 
personnel. Use of temporary access roads could create safety implications for forest companies that are 
active in the area.  

Temporary and permanent infrastructure for the Project will also introduce a new feature in the tenured 
area that forestry companies might have to consider in forest harvest planning and in meeting biodiversity 
or other regulatory objectives.  

Mitigation measures include salvaging and decking timber as denoted in the Project-specific Timber 
Salvage Plan or in accordance with landowner requests and avoiding bulldozing salvageable timber. With 
 

   
Page 6-107 

 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
the implementation of the mitigation, the potential residual effect is considered to be reversible in the 
long-term, of low magnitude, high in probability and not significant (Table 6.2.28, point [d]). 

Disruption of Outfitting Trapping, Hunting and Fishing Activities of Aboriginal and Non-Aboriginal 
Land Users During Construction 
Outfitting, trapping, hunting and fishing activities occur along the pipeline route and throughout the HORU 
RSA. In 2013, there were 22 guide outfitters operating in the WMUs crossed by the Project (Brick pers. 
comm.) and three registered trapping areas are crossed by the pipeline route. There are five fish-bearing 
watercourses that may be used for fishing are crossed by the pipeline route. Hunting and fishing occurs 
throughout the HORU RSA. Construction and site-specific maintenance could disrupt guide outfitting, 
trapping, hunting and fishing activities by creating land disturbances, increasing noise and dust, decreasing 
safety for land users, affecting targeted wildlife species, changing access, affecting local economies and 
livelihoods. 

Activities associated with construction, including right-of-way clearing and clean-up, may affect these 
resource users in the immediate vicinity of construction activities. Construction will clear vegetation and 
create land disturbances using heavy machinery that will release noise and emissions; the quality of the 
user experience may be affected; and construction and clean-up will overlap with hunting seasons and 
trapping activities. In addition, land disturbances could result in habitat loss or alteration, change wildlife 
movement patterns and increase wildlife or fish mortality. These potential effects could result in reduced 
populations of wildlife and fish species that are harvested by humans. Potential effects on wildlife are 
discussed in Section 6.2.10 and potential effects on fish are discussed in Section 6.2.7. Construction of the 
Project may change access to areas by either restricting access to sites or improving access to areas that 
may otherwise have had limited accessibility.  

The impact balance of this residual effect is considered negative. For individuals that use land and 
resources within the HORU RSA for outfitting, trapping, hunting and fishing as part of their livelihoods, any 
disruption to these activities could result in a disruption of livelihood or livelihood use patterns for resource 
users. The magnitude of this residual effect is considered to be medium, as the effect would be detectable 
and beyond a nuisance or inconvenience as it could have livelihood implications. Reduced resource-based 
business income on livelihoods in discussed in Section 6.2.19. 

Effects will be managed by informing all appropriate federal and provincial resource agencies and interested 
municipal officials of the Project developments as warranted; discouraging unauthorized public vehicle 
access along the right-of-way during construction through the use of signs; and restricting all construction 
activities to the approved surveyed right-of-way. 

Operational activities are not expected to affect outfitting, hunting, trapping or fishing. The disruption of 
outfitting, hunting, trapping and fishing activities is considered to be reversible in the short-term (i.e., limited 
to the construction phase). With the implementation of the mitigation measures, the residual effect of a 
disruption of outfitting, trapping, hunting and fishing activities of Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal land users is 
considered not significant (Table 6.2.28, point [e]). 

Combined Effects on Human Occupancy and Resource Use 
The following potential residual effects are likely to occur and may act in combination to result in overall 
effects on HORU during construction and operations of the Project: 

• decrease in quality of outdoor recreational experience of resource users during 
construction and site-specific maintenance; 

• sensory disturbance for land and resource users; 

• alteration of viewsheds; 

• loss of forestry resources and reduction of land base for timber harvest; and 

 
   

Page 6-108 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
• disruption of outfitting trapping, hunting and fishing activities of Aboriginal and 

non-Aboriginal land users during construction. 

With the implementation of the applicable mitigation presented in Table 6.2.27, combined effects on human 
occupancy and resource are considered reversible in the long-term, medium in magnitude, high in 
probability and not significant (Table 6.2.28, point [f]). 

6.2.12.5 Summary 

As identified in Table 6.2.28, there are no situations for human occupancy and resource use that would 
result in a significant socio-economic residual effect. Consequently, it is concluded that the residual 
socio-economic effects of pipeline construction and operations on human occupancy and resource use will 
be not significant. 

6.2.13 Heritage Resources 

6.2.13.1 Spatial Boundaries 

Spatial boundaries used in the effects assessment on heritage resources considered one or more of the 
following areas: 

• a Footprint Study Area (as defined in Section 1.4); and 

• a Heritage Resources RSA. 

The spatial boundaries of the Heritage Resources RSA (Figure 5.8) for the Project comprise the area 
extending beyond the Footprint and are defined as an area of adjoining Borden Blocks crossed by the 
pipeline route (Borden and Duff 1952). A Borden Block measures 10 minutes of latitude by 10 minutes of 
longitude which is the accepted standard division of land used by archaeologists across Canada. For the 
Project, the Borden Blocks intersected by the pipeline route measure approximately 12 km east-west by 
18 km north-south.  

6.2.13.2 Heritage Resources Context 

The discussion of heritage resources presents potential effects related to the terrestrial components of the 
Project as a whole (e.g., pipeline, compressor stations, access road and temporary infrastructure and 
workspace). The evaluation of heritage resources is the same for all components. 

The potential for encountering heritage resources within the Footprint Study Area is reduced by aligning 
the pipeline corridor to parallel existing linear disturbances to the extent feasible (i.e., 28 km or 77%). One 
archaeological site has been identified previously in the Heritage Resources RSA, though no sites are 
located within the Footprint as currently proposed.  

For the HRIA, background data was reviewed and subsequently complemented with ground 
reconnaissance which targeted areas for more intensive visual inspection and, where warranted, shovel 
testing. Fieldwork was conducted by qualified archaeologists with participation from members of Christina 
River Dene Nation Council, Saddle Lake Cree Nation, Fort McMurray First Nation No. 468, Fort McMurray 
Métis Local No. 1935 and Willow Lake Métis Local No. 780. An HRIA of the pipeline corridor was conducted 
under frost-free and snow-free conditions from September 25, 2013 to October 4, 2013 upon receipt of 
Alberta Culture Archaeological Research Permit No. 13-171. The ground reconnaissance and shovel 
testing programs focused on areas along the pipeline route that were of moderate to high potential for 
archaeological, historic and palaeontological sites. During HRIA fieldwork, a total of 58 shovel tests were 
excavated across the Project area, with none testing positive for cultural materials. 

An application was made to Alberta Culture for the proposed compressor station location and clearance 
was received on July 3, 2014. 

With regards to palaeontological resources, the pipeline route crosses two sections in the Heritage 
Resources RSA, 28-81-16 W4M and 29-81-16 W4M, listed as having an HRV value of 5p for 

 
   

Page 6-109 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
palaeontological resources in the current Listing of Historical Resources (Alberta Culture 2013). According 
to Steppe Consulting Limited, there is low potential for the pipeline route to impact palaeontological 
resources (Appendix 9).  

6.2.13.3 Potential Effects, Mitigation Measures and Potential Residual Effects  

Potential effects associated with the construction of the Project on heritage resources are listed in 
Table 6.2.29. These interactions are based on the results of the literature review, desktop analysis, field 
work, engagement with Aboriginal communities, landowners, government agencies, stakeholders and the 
general public (Section 3.0), and the professional experience of the assessment team. No interaction 
between the operations of the Project and heritage resources was identified and, consequently, no potential 
effects for the operations of the Project have been included in Table 6.2.29. 

Mitigation measures to reduce the severity of potential effects of the on heritage resources are presented 
in Table 6.2.29 and were developed in accordance with NGTL standards as well as industry and provincial 
regulatory guidelines including AENV (1994a) and CAPP (1999). 

TABLE 6.2.29 
 

POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND RESIDUAL 
EFFECTS OF PROJECT CONSTRUCTION ON HERITAGE RESOURCES 

Potential Effect 
Socio-Economic 

Region(s) 
Spatial 

Boundary 
Key Recommendations/Mitigation Measures 

[EPP Reference]1 
Potential Residual 

Effect(s) 
1. Disturbance of previously 

unidentified heritage 
resource sites during 
construction  

Pipeline and 
compressor station 

Footprint • If archaeological historical or palaeontological 
artifacts or features (e.g., arrow heads, modified 
bone, pottery fragments, fossils) not previously 
identified are found on the right-of-way or facility 
site during construction follow conditions outlined in 
the Heritage Resource Discovery Contigency Plan 
(Appendix 1E) [Section 7.1]. 

• Prohibit the collection of Heritage Resources by 
Project personnel [Section 7.1].  

• If the House River Valley is trenched, monitoring is 
required on the slopes of the Valley. If the House 
River Valley is directionally drilled, no further 
palaeontological action is required. The 
palaeontological consultant must inform Alberta 
Culture if directional drilling is to be used [HRA File 
4780-13-0059]. 

• No residual 
effect 
identified. 

Note: Significant Residual Socio-Economic Effect: A residual socio-economic effect is considered significant if the effect is predicted to be: 
 - high magnitude, high probability, short -term or longer reversibility and regional, provincial or national in extent that cannot be technically or 

 economically mitigated; or 
 - high magnitude, high probability, long-term or permanent reversibility and any spatial boundary that cannot be technically or economically 

 mitigated. 
 

6.2.13.4 Potential Residual Effects 

Heritage resources provide a window into past human experiences and the geological record, and by their 
very nature, are non-renewable. Once disturbed, the resource may be altered or even lost. Consequently, 
the primary mitigation measure in protecting heritage resources is avoidance, and secondarily, site-specific 
mitigation measures developed in consultation with appropriate provincial regulatory authorities and 
approved by these authorities in fulfillment of permit obligations may also be used. In order to better 
understand heritage resources and the historical information associated with these resources, disturbing 
the resource through excavations is an acceptable practice and, in many cases, the only method to collect 
in situ information to add to the archaeological record. Regardless of whether the excavation of the site is 
for academic or development purposes, the loss of heritage resource sites is offset by the recovery of 
knowledge about the site gained through meticulous identifying, cataloguing and preserving of artifacts and 
features in compliance with provincial guidelines. 

 
   

Page 6-110 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Consequently, the ground work completed during the HRIA for the Project mitigates any potential effects 
on the heritage resources indicators (i.e., archaeological sites, historic sites and palaeontological sites).. In 
the unlikely event that an archaeological, historical or palaeontological site is discovered during 
construction, the Heritage Resource Discovery Contingency Plan will be implemented (i.e., construction at 
that location is to stop immediately, notify the Environmental Inspector and consult with the Heritage 
Resource Specialist). Construction activities may resume only with the permission of the provincial 
regulatory authority upon review and approval of any mitigation to compensate for the disturbance. 

Given that disturbances to heritage resources by the Project are effectively offset by knowledge gained 
through the mitigation measures approved by the provincial regulatory authorities, at this time no residual 
effects on heritage resource indicators have been identified and, consequently, no further evaluation of the 
effects of the Project on heritage resources is warranted. 

6.2.14 Traditional Land and Resource Use  

6.2.14.1 Spatial Boundaries 

The TLRU LSA encompasses and extends beyond the Footprint to include the LSA boundaries of water 
quality and quantity, fish and fish habitat, wetlands, vegetation, wildlife and wildlife habitat, and heritage 
resources, since traditional land use is dependent on these resources (Figure 5.10). Accordingly, the LSA 
is defined as a 2 km wide band centred on the proposed pipeline route centre line (i.e., 1 km on both sides 
of the centre line). The TLRU RSA is defined as a 30 km wide band centred on the proposed pipeline route 
centre line (i.e., 15 km on both sides of the centre line) and includes the RSA boundaries of water quality 
and quantity, fish and fish habitat, wetlands, vegetation, wildlife and wildlife habitat, and heritage resources. 

6.2.14.2 Traditional Land and Resource Use Context 

Since April 2013, NGTL has engaged with Aboriginal groups to provide comprehensive information about 
and seek feedback on the Project and to identify anticipated effects of the Project on their assertion of 
Aboriginal rights and title governing traditional and cultural use of the land in the TLRU RSA to maintain a 
traditional lifestyle. Of the fifteen Aboriginal communities NGTL has engaged on the Project ten 
communities have been identified as having an interest in the Project or having interests potentially affected 
by the Project. These communities are as follows: 

• Chipewyan Prairie Dene First Nation; 

• Christina River Dene Nation Council; 

• Fort McMurray First Nation No. 468; 

• Heart Lake First Nation;  

• Saddle Lake Cree Nation; 

• Conklin Métis Local No. 193; 

• Fort McMurray Métis Local No. 1935; 

• Lakeland Métis Local No. 1909; 

• Willow Lake Métis Local No. 780; and 

• Owl River Métis Local No. 1949. 

A detailed summary of NGTL’s engagement activities with each Aboriginal community is provided in the 
Project Application (Attachment AM1 – Aboriginal Engagement Summary). 

Studies received to date from participating Aboriginal communities for the Project identified several 
site-specific TLU locations within the TLRU RSA. Additional information regarding descriptions and 

 
   

Page 6-111 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
locations of known TLU sites within the TLRU RSA is provided in Appendix 10. The results of Project 
engagement, the TLU studies from participating Aboriginal communities as well as a literature and desktop 
review indicate that Aboriginal communities continue to use Crown lands throughout the TLRU RSA for a 
variety of purposes including hunting, trapping, fishing and plant gathering, spiritual/cultural pursuits as well 
as through the use of trails and travelways on the landscape to access subsistence resources and 
neighbouring communities. The desktop review and Project engagement to date have revealed one 
potential TLU site within the proposed pipeline right-of-way requiring mitigation as requested by Fort 
McMurray First Nation No. 468. NGTL has requested that Fort McMurray First Nation No. 468 provide 
additional information about the site and when this information is made available, mitigation measures will 
be discussed. 

6.2.14.3 Potential Effects, Mitigation Measures and Potential Residual Effects  

The potential effects of the Project on TLU were identified based on the results of the literature review, 
desktop analysis, TLU studies and through ongoing engagement with participating Aboriginal communities 
(Appendix 10). 

The potential Project-related effects on social and cultural well-being, human health, and employment and 
economy are considered in Sections 6.2.15, 6.2.16 and 6.2.19, respectively. The potential effects 
associated with accidents and malfunctions on socio-economic elements are provided in Section 6.2.20.  

The potential effects associated with the construction and operations of the Project on TLRU are listed in 
Table 6.2.30. These interactions are based on the results of the literature review, desktop analysis, TLU 
studies, Aboriginal participation during biophysical field work, engagement with Aboriginal communities and 
the professional experience of the assessment team. 

A summary of mitigation measures provided in Table 6.2.30 was principally developed in accordance with 
NGTL standards as well as industry best practices and procedures and provincial regulatory authority 
guidelines related to specific elements such as fish and fish habitat, wetlands, vegetation, wildlife and 
wildlife habitat, and heritage resources, and are recommended based on engagement with Aboriginal 
communities, experience gained from other pipeline projects with similar conditions and the professional 
experience of the assessment team. 

TABLE 6.2.30 
 

POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND RESIDUAL  
EFFECTS OF PROJECT CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS ON TLRU 

Potential Effect Component 
Spatial 

Boundary1 
Key Recommendations/Mitigation Measures 

[EPP Reference]2 
Potential Residual 

Effect(s) 
1.  Disruption of use 

of trails and 
travelways 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

RSA • Provide Aboriginal communities with the proposed construction 
schedule and Project maps [Section 5.0]. 

• Should trails and travelways be identified during supplemental 
engagement with Aboriginal communities, implement the applicable 
measures identified in the TLRU Sites Discovery Contingency Plan, 
where warranted [Appendix 1E]. 

• Site-specific TLU 
identified during 
ongoing engagement 
may be affected 
during construction 
and operations. 

2. Loss of habitation 
sites or reduced 
use of habitation 
sites  

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

RSA • Provide Aboriginal communities with the proposed construction 
schedule and Project maps [Section 5.0]. 

• The Project is aligned to follow existing linear disturbances, such 
as pipelines, disturbed areas, seismic lines and roads, to the extent 
practical (approximately 77% of the proposed route parallels 
existing disturbances).  

• Conditions outlined in the Heritage Resource Discovery 
Contingency Plan [Appendix 1E] will be implemented if historical or 
palaeontological features (e.g., arrow heads, modified bone, 
pottery, fragments, and fossils) not previously identified are found 
on the right-of-way during construction. 

• The collection of Historical Resources by Project personnel will be 
prohibited [Section 7.1]. 

• Site-specific TLU 
identified during 
ongoing engagement 
may be affected 
during construction 
and operations. 

 

 
   

Page 6-112 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.30  Cont'd 

Potential Effect Component 
Spatial 

Boundary1 
Key Recommendations/Mitigation Measures 

[EPP Reference]2 
Potential Residual 

Effect(s) 
2. Loss of habitation 

sites or reduced 
use of habitation 
sites (cont’d) 

See above See above • Implement appropriate measures identified in the TLU Sites 
Discovery Contingency Plan [Appendix 1E] if TLU sites not 
previously identified are found on the right-of-way during 
construction. 

• General environmental protection measures that will be used 
during Project construction are outlined in Sections 7.0 and 8.4 of 
the EPP. 

• See above. 

3.  Disruption of 
subsistence plant 
gathering and 
alteration of plant 
harvesting sites 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

RSA • Provide Aboriginal communities with the proposed construction 
schedule and Project maps [Section 5.0]. 

• The Project is aligned to follow existing linear disturbances, such 
as pipelines, disturbed areas, seismic lines and roads, to the extent 
practical (approximately 77% of the proposed route parallels 
existing disturbances).  

• Prevent ground disturbance by using a protective layer such as 
frost packing, snow, ice or matting, or biodegradable geotextile and 
clay ramps between wetland root/seed bed and construction 
equipment [Section 7.0]. 

• Use a combination of natural recovery and reclamation methods 
that accelerate vegetation regeneration. Accelerated reclamation 
measures may include: site preparation (e.g., mounding) to 
enhance microsite conditions that promote seed germination 
and/or seedling growth; planting conifer seedlings; and 
willow/shrub staking at riparian areas [Table 1 in Section 7.1]. 

• Replace grade material to pre-construction contours, except if 
otherwise authorized by the EI(s) or designate [Section 8.8]. 

• Implement appropriate measures identified in the TLU Sites 
Discovery Contingency Plan [Appendix 1E] if TLU sites not 
previously identified are found on the right-of-way during 
construction. 

• Site-specific TLU 
identified during 
ongoing engagement 
may be affected 
during construction 
and operations. 

• Disruption of 
subsistence activities 
during construction. 

• Alteration of 
subsistence 
resources. 

4.  Disturbance of 
hunting activities  

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

RSA • Provide Aboriginal communities with the proposed construction 
schedule, pipeline route and facility site maps [Section 5.0]. 

• Notify registered trappers at least two weeks prior to construction. 
[Section 5.0]. 

• Project personnel are not permitted to hunt or fish on the work site 
[Section 7.1]. 

• Do not harass, feed wildlife or permit construction personnel to 
have dogs on the right-of-way. Firearms are not permitted in 
Project vehicles, on the right-of-way or at associated Project 
facilities. In addition, prohibit recreational use of all-terrain vehicles 
or snowmobiles by construction personnel on the right-of-way. 
Report any incidents with nuisance wildlife or collisions with wildlife 
to provincial regulators and the local police detachment, if 
applicable [Section 7.1]. 

• Leave gaps in windrows (i.e., grubbing piles, strippings, grade 
spoil, rollback, strung pipe) at obvious drainages and wildlife trails. 
Locations where wildlife gaps are appropriate will be determined in 
the field by the EI(s). Gaps should align [Section 7.1]. 

• Implement appropriate measures identified in the TLU Sites 
Discovery Contingency Plan [Appendix 1E] if TLU sites not 
previously identified are found on the right-of-way during 
construction. 

• See additional mitigation measures related to hunting outlined in 
Section 6.2.12 Human Occupancy and Resource Use. 

• Site-specific TLU 
identified during 
ongoing engagement 
may be affected 
during construction. 

• Disruption of 
subsistence activities 
during construction 
and operations. 

• Alteration of 
subsistence 
resources. 

 

 
   

Page 6-113 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.30  Cont'd 

Potential Effect Component 
Spatial 

Boundary1 
Key Recommendations/Mitigation Measures 

[EPP Reference]2 
Potential Residual 

Effect(s) 
5.  Disturbance of 

fishing activities  
Pipeline 
(watercourse 
crossings) 

RSA • Provide Aboriginal communities with the proposed construction 
schedule and Project maps [Section 5.0]. 

• Project personnel will not be permitted to hunt or fish on the work 
site [Section 7.1]. 

• Construct/install all pipeline crossings as outlined in Table 2 of the 
EPP and in accordance with the typical drawings [Section 8.4 and 
Appendix 1D]. 

• Implement appropriate measures identified in the TLU Sites 
Discovery Contingency Plan [Appendix 1E] if TLU sites not 
previously identified are found on the right-of-way during 
construction. 

• Prohibit clearing of extra temporary workspace within 10 m of a 
watercourse to protect riparian areas. This area shall be clearly 
marked prior to clearing operations. The right-of-way will be 
narrowed through the riparian area, if feasible [Section 8.4]. 

• Limit clearing at watercourse crossings to the removal of trees and 
shrubs to the ditch line and work side areas required for vehicle 
crossings [Section 8.4]. 

• Fell trees away from watercourses. Immediately remove trees, 
debris or soil inadvertently deposited below the high watermark of 
a watercourse [Section 8.4]. 

• Delay grading of the primary banks of watercourses until 
immediately before construction of the crossing. If required, 
appropriate temporary erosion and sediment control structures 
shall be installed, at the discretion of the EI(s) upon initial 
disturbance of the vegetative mat and strippings [Section 8.4].  

• Direct grading away from waterbodies. Do not place fill material in 
a waterbody during grading [Section 8.4]. 

• Ensure that grubbing, stripping and grading on approach slopes to 
watercourses is restricted to an amount required to allow the safe 
passage of equipment, excavation of the trench, and installation of 
the pipeline [Section 8.4]. 

• Do not allow grading within the 10 m riparian buffer immediately 
adjacent to the water crossing until installation of the vehicle 
crossing [Section 8.4]. 

• Conduct fish salvage in accordance with permit conditions using 
appropriate methods and equipment. Release all captured fish to 
areas downstream of the crossing that provide suitable habitat 
[Section 8.4]. 

• See Section 6.2.12 Human Occupancy and Resource Use for 
additional mitigation measures related to fishing. 

• Site-specific TLU 
identified during 
ongoing engagement 
may be affected 
during construction 
and operations. 

• Disruption of 
subsistence activities 
during construction. 

• Alteration of 
subsistence 
resources. 

6.  Disturbance of 
trapping activities  

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

RSA • Provide Aboriginal communities with the proposed construction 
schedule and Project maps [Section 5.0]. 

• Notify registered trappers at least two weeks prior to construction 
[Section 5.0]. 

• Implement appropriate measures identified in the TLU Sites 
Discovery Contingency Plan [Appendix 1E] if TLU sites not 
previously identified are found on the right-of-way during 
construction. 

• See Section 6.2.12 Human Occupancy and Resource Use for 
measures regarding trapping activities. 

• Site-specific TLU 
identified during 
ongoing engagement 
may be affected during 
construction. 

• Disruption of 
subsistence activities 
during construction. 

• Alteration of 
subsistence 
resources. 

7. Disturbance of 
gathering places 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

RSA • Implement appropriate measures identified in the TLU Sites 
Discovery Contingency Plan [Appendix 1E] if TLU sites not 
previously identified are found on the right-of-way during 
construction. 

• Fencing will be supplemented with signage after clearing 
[Section 6.0].  

• Site-specific TLU 
identified during 
ongoing engagement 
may be affected 
during construction 
and operations. 

 
   

Page 6-114 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.30  Cont'd 

Potential Effect Component 
Spatial 

Boundary1 
Key Recommendations/Mitigation Measures 

[EPP Reference]2 
Potential Residual 

Effect(s) 
8. Disturbance of 

sacred sites 
Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

RSA • Implement appropriate measures identified in the TLU Sites 
Discovery Contingency Plan [Appendix 1E] if TLU sites not 
previously identified are found on the right-of-way during 
construction. 

• Inform any potentially affected Aboriginal community of the 
discovery and  the mitigation to be implemented (Appendix 1E). 

• Fencing will be supplemented with signage after clearing 
[Section 6.0].  

• Site-specific TLU 
identified during 
ongoing engagement 
and may be affected 
during construction 
and operations. 

 

Notes: 1 RSA = TLRU RSA. 
 2 Detailed mitigation measures are outlined in the Project-specific EPP (Appendix 1E). 
 

6.2.14.4 Significance Evaluation of Potential Residual Effects 

Where there are no standards, guidelines, objectives or other established and accepted ecological 
thresholds to define quantitative rating criteria or where quantitative thresholds are not appropriate, the 
qualitative method is considered to be the appropriate method for determining the significance of the 
anticipated residual socio-economic effects. Consequently, a qualitative assessment of TLRU was 
determined to be the most appropriate approach with the evaluation of significance of each of the potential 
residual effects relying on the professional judgment of the assessment team.  

Table 6.2.31 provides a summary of the significance evaluation of the potential residual effects of the 
construction and operations of the Project on TLU. The rationale used to evaluate the significance of each 
of the residual effects is provided below. In accordance with methodology set out in Section 6.1, all 
assessment criteria were considered when determining the significance of each residual effect, however, 
the most influential assessment criteria were magnitude and reversibility of potential residual effects. 
Qualitative significance determinations incorporate professional judgment, which allows for integration of 
all effects criteria ratings to provide relevant significance conclusions that are sensitive to context and 
facilitate decision-making (Lawrence 2007). 

TABLE 6.2.31 
 

CHARACTERIZATION OF POTENTIAL RESIDUAL  
EFFECTS FOR EVALUATION OF SIGNIFICANCE – TLRU 

Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
a. Site-specific TLU 

identified during 
ongoing engagement 
may be affected during 
construction and 
operations 

Impact balance: Negative TLU may be affected as a result of construction and operations activities. 
Spatial boundary: TLRU LSA Site-specific TLU extending from the Project Footprint into the TLRU LSA may be 

physically disturbed.  
Duration: Short-Term The event causing site-specific TLU to be affected is construction of the pipeline and 

compressor station or the site-specific maintenance during the operations of the 
pipeline. 

Frequency: Isolated to Periodic The event causing site-specific TLU to be affected during construction is confined to a 
specific period. During operations, the events causing site-specific TLU to be affected 
are maintenance activities which occur intermittently but repeatedly, over the 
assessment period. 

Reversibility: Short to Long-Term Most effects will be reversed within the construction phase (i.e., disturbance to fishing 
and plant harvesting sites along the pipeline right-of-way) while other effects will 
extend beyond the first 2 years of the operations phase (i.e., disturbance of hunting 
sites near the operating compressor station). 

Magnitude: Low to Medium Mitigation strategies are in place to reduce effects on site-specific TLU values to a 
low to medium magnitude. 

Probability: High Site-specific TLU sites have been identified in the TLRU RSA and are discussed in 
Appendix 10. 

Confidence: High Based on past projects of similar scope, the professional experience of the 
assessment team and the results of the TLU studies conducted to date. 

 
 

   
Page 6-115 

 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.31  Cont’d 

Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
a. Site-specific TLU 

identified during 
ongoing engagement 
may be affected during 
construction and 
operations (cont’d) 

Significance: Not Significant  The residual effect expected during construction and operations on site-specific TLU 
identified during ongoing engagement is considered to be reversible in the short to 
long-term and of low to medium magnitude and is, therefore, considered not 
significant. 

b. Disruption of 
subsistence activities 
may occur during 
construction and 
operations 

Impact balance: Negative Construction and site-specific maintenance activities during operations of the 
proposed pipeline and compressor station may disrupt subsistence activities in the 
TLRU RSA. 

Spatial boundary: TLRU RSA Construction and operation activities of the proposed Project may affect subsistence 
activities beyond the Project Footprint and TLRU LSA. 

Duration: Short- to Long-Term The event causing disruption to subsistence activities is construction of the pipeline 
and compressor station or the operations of the compressor station which may cause 
a long-term sensory disturbance to land users. 

Frequency: Isolated to continuous The event causing disruption of  subsistence activities during construction is confined 
to a specific period. During operations, the events causing subsistence activities to be 
affected is the operations of the compressor station. 

Reversibility: Short to Long-Term Most of the effects causing the disruption of subsistence activates are limited to the 
construction phase (i.e., disruption of trails and travelways) while other effects may 
extend beyond the first 2 years of the operations phase (i.e., disturbance of hunting 
activities in the vicinity of the compressor station). 

Magnitude: Medium  Mitigation strategies are in place to reduce the potential residual effect to a moderate 
modification of the socio-economic environment. 

Probability: High Subsistence activities and land users have been identified within the TLRU RSA. 
Confidence: High Based on past projects of similar scope, the professional experience of the 

assessment team and the results of the TLU studies conducted to date. 
Significance: Not Significant  The residual effect of disruption of subsistence hunting, fishing and plant harvesting 

during construction and operation is considered to be reversible in the short to 
long-term and of medium magnitude, and is, therefore, not significant.  

c. Alteration of 
subsistence resources 

Impact balance: Negative Construction and operations of the proposed pipeline and compressor station may 
alter subsistence resources in the TLRU RSA. 

Spatial boundary: TLRU RSA The potential effects may extend beyond the Footprint into the ZOI of target 
environmental resources. 

Duration: Short to Long-Term The event causing an alteration of subsistence resources is construction of the 
pipeline and compressor station or the operations of the compressor station. 

Frequency: Isolated to continuous The event causing an alteration of subsistence resources during construction is 
confined to a specific period. During operations, the events causing an alteration of 
subsistence resources is the operations of the compressor station. 

Reversibility: Long-Term The effects of disturbance to traditionally harvested resources will be dependent on 
each target species’ sensitivities and could extend greater than 10 years following 
decommissioning and abandonment, once native vegetation regenerates over the 
Project Footprint. 

Magnitude: Low to High The effects assessment results for fish and fish habitat, wetlands, vegetation, wildlife 
and wildlife habitat and species at risk indicates that effects to traditionally harvested 
resources may be detectable and is dependent on each target species’ sensitivities, 
with the exception of the woodland caribou population whereby residual effects are 
beyond environmental and regulatory standards. 

Probability: High Subsistence resources have been identified within the Project Footprint and TLU 
LSA. 

Confidence: High Based on past projects of similar scope, the professional experience of the 
assessment team and the results of the TLU studies conducted to date. 

Significance: Not Significant to 
Significant 

The residual effect of an alteration of subsistence resources is generally considered 
to be reversible in the long-term and of low to medium magnitude, and is, therefore, 
not significant. However, the residual effect on subsistence resource related to 
woodland caribou is of high magnitude, high probability and of long-term reversibility 
and, is therefore, considered significant. 

d. Combined effects on 
TLU 

Impact balance: Negative The combined socio-economic effects on TLU could occur at any point in the TLRU 
RSA. 

Spatial boundary: TLRU RSA The potential effects may extend beyond the Footprint into the ZOI of target 
environmental resources. 

 
   

Page 6-116 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.31  Cont’d 

Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
d. Combined effects on 

TLU (cont’d) 
Duration: Short to Long-Term The event causing the combined effects on TLU is construction of the pipeline and 

compressor station or the operations of the compressor station. 
Frequency: Isolated to continuous The event causing the combined effects on TLU during construction is confined to a 

specific period. During operations, the events causing the combined effects is the 
operations of the compressor station. 

Reversibility: Long-Term Overall, the reversibility is long-term since the combined effects may occur for the 
duration of the operations phase and could extend greater than 10 years when the 
Project is no longer in operation. 

Magnitude: Low to High The combined effects will be detectable by traditional resource users and are 
dependent on each target species’ sensitivities and given that equivalent land use 
capability will be maintained by the application of the mitigation strategies described 
in this ESA and in the EPP, most combined effects on TLU are considered to be of 
low to medium magnitude. However, the exception is the woodland caribou 
population whereby residual effects are beyond environmental and regulatory 
standards and therefore, the magnitude of TLU values related to woodland caribou is 
considered to be high.  

Probability: High The combined effects on TLU are considered to be likely to occur during the life of the 
Project. 

Confidence: High Based on past projects of similar scope, the professional experience of the 
assessment team and the results of the TLU studies conducted to date. 

Significance: Not Significant to 
Significant 

The combined effects on TLU are generally considered to be reversible in the 
long-term and of low to medium magnitude, and is, therefore, not significant. 
However, the combined effect on TLU related to woodland caribou is of high 
magnitude, high probability and of long-term reversibility and, is therefore, considered 
significant. 

Note: Significant Residual Socio-Economic Effect: A residual socio-economic effect is considered significant if the effect is predicted to be: 
 - high magnitude, high probability, short to medium-term reversibility and regional, provincial or national in extent that cannot be technically or 

economically mitigated; or 
 - high magnitude, high probability, long-term or permanent reversibility and any spatial boundary that cannot be technically or economically 

mitigated. 
 

Site-Specific Traditional Land Use 
Participating Aboriginal communities provided NGTL with information regarding TLU sites in the Project 
TLRU LSA. Studies received to date from participating Aboriginal communities for the Project identified 
several site-specific TLU locations (including trails and travelways, habitation sites, plant harvesting sites, 
hunting sites, fishing sites, trapping sites, gathering places and sacred areas) few of which are directly 
affected by the Project Footprint or TLRU LSA. Concerns regarding TLU sites were addressed by NGTL’s 
proposed mitigation measures, and there are no outstanding concerns (Appendix 10). Should TLU sites be 
identified during ongoing engagement with participating Aboriginal communities, the mitigation measures 
outlined in Table 6.2.30 and the TLU Sites Discovery Contingency Plan (Appendix 1E of the EPP) will be 
implemented. The impact balance of this residual effect is considered negative since TLU may be affected 
as a result of construction and operations activities. Many of the residual effects expected during 
construction and operations on site-specific TLU identified during ongoing engagement will be reversed 
within the construction phase (i.e., disturbance to fishing and plant harvesting sites along the pipeline 
right-of-way) while other effects will be reversible in the long-term following the decommissioning of the 
compressor station (i.e., disturbance of hunting sites near the operating compressor station). The residual 
effects on wildlife movement and non-traditional hunting are assessed in Section 6.2.10 and Section 6.2.12, 
respectively. The residual effects are considered to be of low to medium magnitude, since mitigation is 
expected to be effective at reducing the effect to a moderate modification of the socio-economic 
environment and strategies are in place in the event any unidentified TLU sites are discovered 
(Table 6.2.31, point [a]).  

Disruption of Subsistence Activities  
This assessment considers that TLU activities including fishing, hunting, trapping and plant harvesting are 
conducted to procure subsistence resources. The results of the TLU studies received to date from 
participating Aboriginal communities indicate that substance activities are practiced in the TLRU RSA. 
 

   
Page 6-117 

 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Concerns regarding subsistence activities were addressed by NGTL’s proposed mitigation measures, and 
there are no outstanding concerns (Appendix 10). Should subsistence resources be identified during 
ongoing engagement with participating Aboriginal communities, the mitigation measures outlined in 
Table 6.2.30 will be implemented. The impact balance of this residual effect is considered negative since 
construction of the Project and operations of the compressor station may disrupt subsistence resources in 
the TLRU RSA. The magnitude of this residual effect is considered to be medium, since mitigation strategies 
are in place and will also be used in the event any unidentified subsistence resources are discovered during 
ongoing engagement. In addition, the effects assessment results for water quality and quantity, fish and 
fish habitat, vegetation, wetlands, and wildlife and wildlife habitat demonstrate that equivalent land use 
capability will be maintained by the application of the mitigation strategies described in this ESA and in the 
EPP for the Project. The residual effects associated with the disruption of subsistence activities are 
considered reversible in the short to long-term since most of the effects causing sensory disturbance to 
traditional land users are limited to the construction phase (i.e., disruption of trails and travelways) while 
other effects may extend beyond the first 2 years of the operations phase (i.e., disturbance of hunting 
activities in the vicinity of the compressor station) of medium magnitude and, therefore, is considered not 
significant (Table 6.2.31, point [b]).  

Alteration of Subsistence Resources 
Subsistence resources may be altered during construction and operations of the Project. The alteration of 
subsistence resources could manifest itself through changes to local harvesting locales, behavioural 
alteration or sensory disturbance of environmental resources or increased public access to traditional 
harvesting areas and increased pressure on environmental resources. The operation of the proposed 
Project will affect subsistence resources primarily due to temporary disturbances related to maintenance 
activities but also to a lesser degree, the operations of the compressor station. 

The impact balance of this residual effect is negative as changes to the distribution and abundance of 
resources could in turn result in alteration of harvesting areas and, subsequently, in indirect effects such as 
harvesters having to spend more time and money to travel further for subsistence activities. Despite the 
implementation of the proposed mitigation measures provided in Table 6.2.30, traditional land and resource 
users may still be unable to use, or be deterred from using, certain areas at times during construction and 
operations of the Project and the effect is considered to be of low to medium magnitude, depending on 
each resource’s site-specific sensitivities, and not significant (Table 6.2.31, point [c]). The results of effects 
assessments for fish and fish habitat, wetlands, vegetation, wildlife and wildlife habitat and species at risk 
indicate that although there may be residual effects due to the construction and operations of the Project, 
the effects are considered to be not significant, with the exception of woodland caribou. It has been 
determined that there is a currently-existing significant adverse effect on this population (see Section 6.2.11 
for further discussion regarding the woodland caribou significance evaluation). While no current 
subsistence harvesting of woodland caribou was identified within the TLRU RSA in any Project-specific 
TLU studies, woodland caribou have been harvested in the past. Although future harvesting of woodland 
caribou may be unlikely given the recent historical decline of the population, the effect extends the inability 
of Aboriginal groups to exercise their harvesting rights. Consequently, the residual effect of an alteration of 
subsistence resources as it relates to woodland caribou is considered to be of high magnitude and 
significant. 

Summary of Combined Effects on Traditional Land and Resource Use 
As identified in Table 6.2.31, with the exception of TLU values related to woodland caribou, there are no 
situations with regard to TLU that would result in a significant socio-economic residual effect. However, 
residual effects of the Project on woodland caribou are expected to be significant (Section 6.2.11). Residual 
effects on TLU potentially related to woodland caribou is also considered to be significant. While no current 
subsistence harvesting of woodland caribou was identified within the TLRU RSA in any Project-specific 
TLU studies, TLU desktop review has indicated that woodland caribou are a historic traditionally harvested 
species for Aboriginal groups potentially affected by the Project. Significant adverse effects to woodland 
caribou extends the inability of Aboriginal groups to exercise their harvesting rights. Consequently, it is 
concluded that the residual effect on TLU within the TLRU RSA generally will be not significant, with the 
exception of TLU values related to woodland caribou, which will be considered significant (Table 6.2.31, 
point [d]). 

 
   

Page 6-118 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
6.2.15 Social and Cultural Well-Being 

6.2.15.1 Spatial Boundaries 

The spatial boundaries considered for the effects assessment on social and cultural well-being considered 
one or more of the following areas: 

• the Project Footprint (as defined in Section 1.4);  

• a Socio-economic LSA; and  

• a Socio-economic RSA.  

The spatial boundary of the Socio-economic LSA is defined as the boundaries of communities, where it can 
reasonably be expected that direct effects from the Project would occur. These communities include the 
Urban Service Area of Fort McMurray and the Town of Athabasca. The spatial boundary for the 
Socio-economic RSA consists of the boundaries of the RM of Wood Buffalo and Lac La Biche County.  

The Project may result in potential interactions with the Hamlets of Conklin, Janvier, Anzac, Lac La Biche 
and other nearby communities (Table 6.1). Statistical data for unincorporated hamlets and communities are 
amalgamated into the county or region in which they are geographically located and by which they are 
administered. As such, unincorporated hamlets and communities are not identified as study area 
communities. Information on key unincorporated hamlets and communities that may be directly affected by 
the Project is presented where available.  

6.2.15.2 Social and Cultural Well-Being and Context 

The sense of social and cultural well-being of a community or region is dynamic and influenced by multiple 
factors and may be experienced differently by different people. Changes in socio-economic components 
such as land and resource use, local and regional services (e.g., emergency services, recreational facilities, 
housing and commercial accommodation), access (e.g., roads and waterways) and economic conditions 
(e.g., employment, business activities and training) can be used to help provide an indication of social and 
cultural well-being. Baseline data relating to these elements is presented in human occupancy and 
resources use (Section 5.2.12), infrastructure and services (Section 5.17), navigation and navigation safety 
(Section 5.18), and employment and economy (Section 5.19).  

The Project crosses one regional municipality and one county. No cities, towns, villages or other 
communities are crossed by the Project. The Project is located approximately 84 km south of Fort McMurray 
via Highway 63 and approximately 155 km north of the Town of Athabasca. 

6.2.15.3 Potential Effects, Mitigation Measures and Potential Residual Effects 

A summary of mitigation measures to reduce the severity of potential effects of the Project on social and 
cultural well-being are presented in Table 6.2.32. These measures were developed in accordance with 
NGTL standards and several industry, provincial and regulatory guidelines including NEB (2010a,b), AENV 
(1988, 1994a) and CAPP (1996, 1999). In addition, these measures have been considered acceptable by 
the NEB for past pipeline projects including NGTL’s Cutbank River Lateral Loop (Bald Mountain Section) 
Project, Bear River West Lateral Loop Project and Kearl Extension and Sales Meter Station Project 
(NEB 2010a,b,c). 

  

 
   

Page 6-119 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
TABLE 6.2.32 

 
POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF  

PROJECT CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS ON SOCIAL AND CULTURAL WELL-BEING 

Potential Effect Component 
Spatial 

Boundary1 
Key Recommendations/Mitigation Measures 

[EPP Reference]2 Potential Residual Effect(s) 
1. Change to 

community life due 
to presence of 
construction activity 
and temporary 
workers 

Pipeline and 
compressor station 

RSA • Implement TransCanada’s Contractor Drug and 
Alcohol Policy. 

• Adhere to TransCanada’s Health, Safety and 
Environment Commitment in Section 8.0 of this ESA. 

• See mitigation to address the potential effects on 
human occupancy and resource and use in 
Section 6.2.12. 

• See mitigation to address the potential effects on 
infrastructure and services potential in 
Section 6.2.17. 

• Disruption of community life 
by transient workers. 

 

Notes: 1  RSA = Socio-economic RSA. 
 2  Detailed mitigation measures are outlined in the Project-specific EPP (Appendix 1).  
 

6.2.15.4 Significance Evaluation of Potential Residual Effects 

The assessment of potential effects on social and cultural well-being has been conducted considering all 
Project components in an integrated manner (e.g., pipeline, compressor station, access road). Many 
potential effects are related to presence of Project workers, employment and contracting opportunities, and 
overall community perspectives, which cannot be meaningfully disaggregated by Project component.  

A qualitative assessment was considered the most appropriate method to evaluate the significance of 
potential residual effects on social and cultural well-being, due to the lack of quantitative data and accepted 
standards, guidelines and social thresholds. This qualitative assessment relied on available research, 
literature and the professional judgment of the assessment team.  

Table 6.2.33 provides a summary of the significance evaluation of potential residual socio-economic effects 
of the construction and operations of the Project on social and cultural well-being. The rationale used to 
evaluate the significance of each of the residual socio-economic effects is provided below. All assessment 
criteria were considered when determining the significance of each residual effect, but the most influential 
assessment criteria were reversibility, magnitude and probability. 

TABLE 6.2.33 
 

CHARACTERIZATION OF POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS FOR 
EVALUATION OF SIGNIFICANCE – SOCIAL AND CULTURAL WELL-BEING 

Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
a. Disruption of community 

life by transient workers. 
Impact balance: Negative to 
positive 

Effects on community way-of-life may occur during construction of the Project. 

Spatial boundary: Socio-
economic RSA 

Temporary workers will interact with various aspects of community life in the Socio-
economic RSA. 

Duration: Short-term The events causing effects on community way-of-life are limited to the construction of 
the Project. 

Frequency: Isolated The event causing effects on community way-of-life is confined to the construction 
phase. 

Reversibility: Short-term The potential residual effect is limited to the construction phase.  
Magnitude: Medium The proposed mitigation will effectively reduce the residual effect to a moderate 

modification in the socio-economic environment. 
Probability: High Effects on community way-of-life are likely to occur. 
Confidence: Low to moderate The determination of significance is based on the understanding that there are 

challenges in predicting human behaviour (low), but that there is a good understanding 
of cause-effect relationships using data from outside the Project area (moderate).  

 
 

   
Page 6-120 

 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.33  Cont'd 

Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
a. Disruption of community 

life by transient workers. 
(cont’d) 

Significance: Not significant  With the implementation of the mitigation measures outlined in Table 6.2.32, the 
residual effect on community way-of-life is considered not significant. 

 

Disruption of Community Life by Transient Workers 
The impact on community life associated with the Project could be positive, neutral or negative, depending 
on community and individual perspectives. An influx of temporary workers during construction can have 
direct and indirect effects on community way-of-life in the Socio-economic RSA. While the presence of 
temporary workers most notably can result in substantial economic benefits for communities due to 
spending of income, some undesirable social outcomes may also occur. Project-related income can be 
spent in ways that are beneficial and can lead to improved lifestyles or increased opportunities; however, 
income that is spent on drugs, alcohol or gambling, however, could be considered detrimental, as it could 
contribute to social problems in communities or more increased traffic violations/accidents. 

Negative worker/community interactions are not always the case and outcomes will depend heavily on 
individual choices. NGTL will implement a range of measures to reduce the potential for negative 
Project/community interactions including implementing the TransCanada’s Contractor Drug and Alcohol 
Policy and adhering to TransCanada’s Health, Safety and Environment Commitment, provided in 
Section 8.0. However, even with mitigation measures in place to encourage acceptable worker behaviour 
it is impossible and undesirable to control all aspects of workers during their off-time spent in communities 
during the construction phase.  

It is expected that the Project construction workforce will be working extended hours, which will not leave a 
substantial amount of time for recreational activities after work hours. It is also expected that some of the 
workforce will be local. However, regardless of work hours, NGTL's policies and commitments with respect 
to health and safety, and the provision of recreation activities for workers, it is not always possible to prevent 
adults from engaging in certain behaviours when they are on their time off and not on the job. The impact 
will depend on the size of the community in relation to the size of the temporary workforce. NGTL has 
estimated a peak workforce during the construction period of approximately 450 skilled laborers and 
operators and 40 inspection and quality assurance personnel. Acting as a hub to the oil and gas industry 
in northern Alberta, Fort McMurray has a population of 61,374 (2011) and the addition of 450 workers is 
expected to be absorbed as temporary construction camps will be used during the construction phase, 
limiting the potential for workers to have an interaction with the listed communities. Temporary workers may 
still interact with communities in the Socio-economic LSA and Socio-economic RSA during time-off.  

Potential effects to human occupancy and resource use and infrastructure and services are discussed 
further in Section 6.2.12 and 6.2.17, respectively.  

With the implantation of the mitigation, the potential residual effect is considered to be reversible in the 
short-term, medium in magnitude, high in probability and not significant (Table 6.2.33). 

6.2.15.5 Summary 

As identified in Table 6.2.33, there are no situations for social and cultural well-being that meet the criteria 
of a significant socio-economic residual effect. Consequently, the potential residual effects of construction 
and operations of the Project on social and cultural well-being will be not significant. 

6.2.16 Human Health 

6.2.16.1 Spatial Boundaries 

The spatial boundaries considered for the effects assessment for human health considered one or more of 
the following areas: 

 
   

Page 6-121 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
• the Project Footprint (as defined in Section 1.4);  

• a HORU LSA; and  

• a HORU RSA.  

The spatial boundaries associated with the HORU LSA and HORU RSA used for the effects assessment 
for Human Health are described under human occupancy and resource use in Section 6.2.12. 

6.2.16.2 Human Health Context  

Human health is defined as “a state of complete physical, mental and social well-being, and the ability to 
adapt to the stresses of daily life; it is not merely the absence of disease or infirmity” (NEB 2014a, World 
Health Organization 1946). This widely accepted interpretation of health recognizes the interrelationships 
between social, biophysical, economic and cultural environments (Health Canada 2004).  

These interrelationships can change depending upon the nature and location of a project. The length of the 
pipeline route is approximately 36 km in length and located in a treed and primarily rural area in northern 
Alberta. The pipeline route is expected to parallel existing linear features for approximately 28 km or 77% 
of its length. The Project will also include the development of a compressor station with a permanent access 
road on the eastern extent of the pipeline route. 

The assessment of potential effects on human health has been conducted by considering all Project 
components in an integrated manner (e.g., pipeline, compressor station and access road). Many potential 
effects cannot be meaningfully disaggregated by Project component. Based on the ocular assessment, no 
residences were identified within the HORU LSA; however, for the purposes of the assessment, it is 
assumed there could be recreation users in the Project area.  

The environmental elements associated with the Project that may be related to human health include water 
quality and quantity, air and GHG emissions, acoustic environment, fish and fish habitat, wildlife and wildlife 
habitat, and accidents and malfunctions. Socio-economic elements that may be related to human health 
include human occupancy and resource use, TLU, social and cultural well-being, infrastructure and 
services, and navigation and navigation safety.  

These environmental and socio-economic elements have been reviewed to identify any Project-related 
activities, toxic components and nuisances that could potentially be sources of adverse human health 
effects and the potential human receptors of these effects. Local residents and land users, including 
Aboriginal communities, may be affected by adverse human health effects such as increases in nuisance 
air emissions, noise and traffic, change in visual quality, disruption of activities, and accidents and 
malfunctions.  

6.2.16.3 Potential Effects, Mitigation Measures and Potential Residual Effects 

The potential effects on human health associated with the construction and operations of the Project and a 
summary of mitigation measures to reduce the severity of potential effects of the Project on human health 
are provided in are listed in Table 6.2.34. These measures were developed in accordance with several 
industry and provincial and regulatory guidelines including AENV (1994b) and CAPP (1999). In addition, 
these measures have been considered acceptable by the NEB for past NGTL pipeline projects including 
the Cutbank River Lateral Loop (Bald Mountain Section) Project, the Bear River West Lateral Loop Project 
and the Kearl Extension and Sales Meter Station Project (NEB 2010a,b,c). 

Various environmental and socio-economic elements interact with human health. In particular, potential 
effects identified for water quality and quantity, air emissions, greenhouse gas emissions acoustic 
environment and human occupancy and resource use elements are linked to the human health potential 
effect of disruption of normal, daily living activities identified in  

  

 
   

Page 6-122 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
TABLE 6.2.34 

 
CHARACTERIZATION OF POTENTIAL RESIDUAL  

EFFECTS FOR EVALUATION OF SIGNIFICANCE – HUMAN HEALTH 

Potential Effect Component 
Spatial 

Boundary1 Recommendations/Mitigation Measures [EPP Reference]2 
Potential 

Residual Effects 
1. Disruption of 

normal, daily 
living activities 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

RSA • Implement the Traffic Control Management Plan and TransCanada’s 
Contractor Drug and Alcohol Policy. 

• Adhere to TransCanada’s Health, Safety and Environment Commitment 
in Section 8.0.  

• Implement mitigation measures related to water in Section 6.2.3, water 
quality and quantity. 

• Implement mitigation measures related to increased air and noise 
emissions outlined in air emissions and acoustic environment, 
Section 6.2.4 and Section 6.2.6, respectively. 

• Implement mitigation measures related to the alteration of native 
vegetation outlined in Section 6.2.9, vegetation. 

• Implement mitigation measures regarding alteration of subsistence 
resources outlined in Section 6.2.14, TLRU. 

• Implement mitigation regarding sensory disturbance to land users, 
changes to existing land use activity and altercation of viewsheds in 
Section 6.2.12, under human occupancy and resource and use. 

• Implement mitigation regarding construction traffic under infrastructure 
and services, Section 6.2.17. 

• Implement mitigation measures regarding accidents and malfunctions 
outlined Section 6.2.20. 

• Disruption of 
daily activities 
of local 
residents and 
land users. 

• Accidents and 
malfunctions 
(see 
Section 6.2.20
). 

2. Concern for 
public safety 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

RSA • Inform all appropriate federal and provincial resource agencies as well 
as interested municipal officials of the Project developments, as 
warranted [Section 5.0].  

• Mark and locate all foreign lines and cables using One-Call services 
before the start of construction to ensure the safety of the workers and 
public [Section 6.0]. 

• Restrict all construction activities to the approved, surveyed right-of-way 
and facility site, and approved temporary workspace, existing roads and 
approved shoo-flies. All construction traffic will adhere to safety and 
road closure regulations [Section 8.1]. 

• Implement measures regarding the safety of watercourse users on 
navigable waters, Section 6.2.18, navigation and navigation safety. 

• Implement mitigation measures regarding accidents and malfunctions 
outlined in Section 6.2.20, accidents and malfunctions. 

 

• The health of 
land users 
and/or 
workers may 
be affected in 
the event of 
an accident or 
malfunction. 

• Safety of 
watercourse 
users on 
navigable 
waters (see 
Section 6.2.19
).  

• Accidents and 
malfunctions 
(see 
Section 6.2.20
).  

Notes: 1 RSA = HORU RSA. 
 2 Detailed mitigation measures are outlined in the Project-specific EPP (Appendix 1). 
 

6.2.16.4 Significance Evaluation of Potential Residual Effects 

A qualitative assessment was considered the most appropriate method to evaluate the significance of 
potential residual effects on human health, due to the lack of quantitative data and accepted standards, 
guidelines and ecological thresholds. This qualitative assessment relied on available research literature 
and the professional judgement of the assessment team.  

Table 6.2.35 provides a summary of the significance evaluation of potential residual socio-economic effects 
of the construction and operations of the Project on human health. The rationale used to evaluate the 
significance of each of the potential residual socio-economic effects is provided below. All assessment 
criteria were considered when determining the significance of each residual effect, but the most influential 
assessment criteria were reversibility, magnitude and probability. 

 
   

Page 6-123 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
TABLE 6.2.35 

 
SIGNIFICANCE EVALUATION OF POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS 

OF PROJECT CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS ON HUMAN HEALTH 

Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
a. Disruption of daily 

activities of local 
residents and land 
users 

Impact Balance: Negative Project activities have the potential to disrupt daily living activities. 
Spatial boundary: HORU 
RSA 

Disruption of normal daily living activities as a result of Project construction and operations may 
affect nearby land users in the HORU RSA. 

Duration: Long-term The events causing a disruption of normal daily living activities is an ongoing event initiated 
during the construction phase (e.g., vehicle and machinery emissions, open burning) and 
extends for the life of the Project (i.e., CAC emissions).  

Frequency: Continuous The event causing the effect occurs continually over the assessment period. 
Reversibility: Long-term The disruption of normal daily living activities extends beyond the first two years of the 

operations phase. 
Magnitude: Medium The proposed mitigation measures will effectively reduce the residual effect to a moderate 

modification in the socio-economic environment. 
Probability: Low The implementation of the proposed mitigation measures is expected to effectively reduce the 

effects of disrupting normal daily living activities of land users. 
Confidence: Moderate The determination of significance is based on a good understanding of cause-effect 

relationships using data from outside the Project area. 
Significance: Not significant  With the implementation of the mitigation measures, the residual effect of disruption of daily 

activities of local residents and land users is considered not significant.  
b. The health of local 

residents, land 
users and/or 
workers may be 
affected in the 
event of an 
accident or 
malfunction 

Impact balance: Negative Project activities have the potential to affect the health of local residents, land users and/or 
workers in the event of an accident or malfunction. 

Spatial boundary: HORU 
LSA 

The effects on human health resulting from an accident or malfunction will extend beyond the 
Footprint; however, not likely into the HORU RSA. 

Duration: Immediate The event causing the effect is an accident or malfunction, the period of which is less than or 
equal to 2 days during either the construction or operations phase. 

Frequency: Accidental An accidental leak or malfunction is rare. 
Reversibility: Short to 
Long-term 

The effects of an accident or malfunction may be resolved in the construction phase or within 
any 1 year during operations (short-term) or extend beyond the first two of the operations 
phase (long-term). 

Magnitude: Low to High Depending upon the type of accident or malfunction and the area in which it occurs (e.g., in a 
remote area, near land users), the residual effect may be detectable but have no effect beyond 
an inconvenience or nuisance, or results in a severe modification in the socio-economic 
environment (high). 

Probability: Low Due to the rarity of an accident or malfunction occurring, it is unlikely that such an event would 
affect the health of local residents, land users and/or workers. 

Confidence: High The determination of significance is based on a good understanding of cause-effect 
relationships using data pertinent to the Project area. 

Significance: Not Significant  With the implementation of the mitigation measures, the residual effect on human health 
resulting from an accident or malfunction is considered not significant.  

 

Disruption of Daily Activities of Local Residents and Land Users  
According to the definition provided in Section 6.2.12, health can include physical, mental and social 
well-being. Project activities may cause stress to local residents and land users which, in turn, could affect 
their health and well-being. 

Residual effects which have been identified as potentially disrupting normal daily living activities of some 
land users during construction include: increased nuisance air emissions; increased noise; disruption of 
land use activities and associated inconvenience; disruption of local traffic patterns; and increased traffic 
volumes. Similar residual effects may occur during some maintenance activities. During operations of the 
proposed Leismer East Compressor Station, residual effects that could potentially disrupt daily, living 
activities include increased air and noise emissions. 

Since the Project is located adjacent to existing disturbances in a remote area, the likelihood of land users 
being affected by the construction and operation of the Project is low. Furthermore, NGTL has a variety of 
procedures, plans and protocols pertaining to the planning, construction and operations of the Project which 
will aid in limiting the disruption that is experienced as a result of construction and operation activities. Given 

 
   

Page 6-124 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
the proposed mitigation measures, the potential residual effect is considered reversible in the long-term, 
medium in magnitude, low in probability and therefore, not significant. (Table 6.2.35, point [a]). 

Accidents or Malfunctions 
Human health effects can potentially occur as a result of a product release due to a pipeline leak or failure. 
Pipeline leaks generally release quantities of gas that are insufficient to produce adverse human health 
effects and would be identified in a timely manner. Therefore, only accidental pipeline failures are 
considered. The impact balance of this potential residual effect is considered to be negative. 

During the operations and maintenance of the Project, a combination of incident prevention measures, 
safety devices and NGTL's Emergency Management System will be implemented to prevent a pipeline 
failure/rupture and ensure public safety. NGTL's strict adherence to a high standard of design, as well as 
the comprehensive construction, operations and maintenance procedures will reduce the risks of operating 
a natural gas pipeline. The pipelines and meter station will be monitored 24-hours per day, and an annual 
visual maintenance procedure will be implemented. NGTL also commits to conducting its business to meet 
or exceed all applicable laws and regulations. Furthermore, the company's Integrated Public Awareness 
Program will be implemented upon completion of construction. This program is intended to help ensure 
ongoing stakeholder communication and issue-resolution during operations. 

Pipelines are considered the safest and most efficient method of transporting large volumes of natural gas 
products over long distances. Although health effects in the event of a pipeline failure/rupture could 
potentially be significant, the probability of occurrence of health effects is low. Therefore, it is unlikely that 
a pipeline failure/rupture with resultant human health effects will occur over the lifetime of the Project 
(Table 6.2.35, point [b]). 

Combined Effects on Human Health 
An evaluation of the combined effects considers those residual effects that are likely to occur. Since the 
probability of the Project affecting the health of land users and the probability of an accident or malfunction 
is low, an evaluation of combined effects of the Project on human health is not warranted. 

6.2.16.5 Summary 

As identified in Table 6.2.35, there are no situations for human health that meet the criteria of a significant 
socio-economic residual effect. Consequently, the residual effects of construction and operations of the 
Project on human health will be not significant. 

6.2.17 Infrastructure and Services 

6.2.17.1 Spatial Boundaries 

The spatial boundaries used in the effects assessment for infrastructure and services (Figure 5.11) 
considered one or more of the following areas: 

• the Project Footprint (as defined in Section 1.4);  

• a Socio-economic LSA; and  

• a Socio-economic RSA.  

The spatial boundaries associated with the Socio-economic LSA and Socio-economic RSA used for the 
effects assessment for infrastructure and services are described in social and cultural well-being, 
Section 6.2.15. 

6.2.17.2 Infrastructure and Services Context 

This subsection describes the potential effects of the Project on physical infrastructure and the capacity of 
community infrastructure and services including roads, airports, electrical transmission lines, emergency 
services, health care, social support services, waste management, housing, commercial accommodation, 

 
   

Page 6-125 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
recreational facilities and educational services. The Project is anticipated to interact with a variety of 
infrastructure and services in the Socio-economic LSA and Socio-economic RSA. Infrastructure that may 
be disturbed by the Project and overall capacity of community infrastructure and services to meet 
Project-related changes in demand are discussed.  

The assessment of potential effects on infrastructure and services has been conducted considering all 
Project components in an integrated manner (e.g., pipeline, compressor station and access road), since 
many potential effects are related to the presence of a temporary construction workforce, the transportation 
of workers and materials during construction, overall Project power requirements, and general construction 
practices for pipeline crossing of linear infrastructure. Infrastructure and service effects are experienced in 
a combined manner by communities, and cannot be meaningfully disaggregated by Project component 
from a community perspective.  

The Socio-economic LSA and Socio-economic RSA are serviced by local roads and highways, including 
Highway 63, and nearby airports that offer scheduled and charter services. The RCMP, paid and volunteer 
fire personnel, Alberta Health Services ambulances and health care facilities offer protective and 
emergency services in the communities in the Socio-economic RSA. Social support services and programs 
are available in the larger communities in the Socio-economic LSA. Solid and liquid waste facilities are 
accessible to the Socio-economic LSA communities. The pipeline route is located in the Northland School 
Division No. 61 and several post-secondary institutions offer programs relevant to the Project. 
Accommodation and camping facilities are available in the Socio-economic LSA as well as a range of 
recreational facilities in the Socio-economic RSA. 

6.2.17.3 Potential Effects, Mitigation Measures and Potential Residual Effects 

The potential effects on infrastructure and services associated with the construction and operations of the 
Project and a summary of mitigation measures to reduce the severity of potential effects are provided in 
Table 6.2.36. These measures were developed in accordance with several industry and provincial and 
regulatory guidelines including AENV (1994b) and CAPP (1999). In addition, these measures have been 
considered acceptable by the NEB for past NGTL pipeline projects (NEB 2010a,b,c). 

Effects of the Project on airports, water infrastructure, housing and commercial accommodations, railway 
use, recreation services and educational services were considered for inclusion in this assessment, but 
were scoped out due to the limited anticipated interaction. 

TABLE 6.2.36 
 

POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF 
PROJECT CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS ON INFRASTRUCTURE AND SERVICES 

Potential Effect Component 
Spatial 

Boundary1 
Key Recommendations/Mitigation Measures 

[EPP Reference]2 
Potential Residual 

Effect(s) 
1. Increased traffic 

volumes as a 
result of 
transporting 
workers, 
supplies and 
equipment 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

RSA • Inform all appropriate federal and provincial resource agencies as well 
as interested municipal officials of the Project developments, as 
warranted [Section 5.0]. 

• Restrict all construction activities to the approved, surveyed right-of-way 
and facility site, the approved temporary workspace, existing roads and 
approved shoo-flies. All construction traffic will adhere to safety and 
road closure regulations [Section 8.1]. 

• Where practical and applicable, use multi-passenger vehicles for the 
transport of crews to and from job sites [Section 8.1]. 

• Discourage unauthorized public vehicle access along the right-of-way, 
facility site and access road during construction through the use of signs 
[Section 8.1]. 

• Clearly delineate areas that have access restrictions. Restrict access to 
essential construction personnel only. Direct all other personnel to the 
right-of-way or facility site via alternate access routes [Section 6.0].  

• Increase in traffic 
on highways and 
access roads 
during 
construction. 

• Sensory 
disturbance for 
land and resource 
users during 
construction and 
site-specific 
maintenance (see 
Section 6.12).  

• Potential residual 
effects related to 
accidents and 
malfunctions (see 
Section 6.2.20). 

 

 
   

Page 6-126 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.36  Cont'd 

Potential Effect Component 
Spatial 

Boundary1 
Key Recommendations/Mitigation Measures 

[EPP Reference]2 
Potential Residual 

Effect(s) 
2. Effects on linear 

infrastructure - 
disruption of 
transmission 
lines and 
pipelines 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

Footprint • Inform all appropriate federal and provincial resource agencies and 
interested municipal officials of the Project developments as warranted 
[Section 5.0]. 

• Mark and locate all foreign lines and cables using One-Call services 
before the start of construction to ensure the safety of the workers and 
public [Section 6.0].  

• Potential residual 
effects related to 
accidents and 
malfunctions 
(Section 6.2.20). 

3. Increased 
demand on local 
emergency, 
protective and 
health care 
services 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

RSA • Inform all appropriate federal and provincial resource agencies and 
interested municipal officials of the Project developments as warranted 
[Section 5.0]. 

• Ensure the Contractor has the necessary fire-fighting equipment on 
hand that is capable of controlling any fire that may occur as a result of 
their activities, as regulated by provincial regulations and government 
agencies [Section 8.1]. 

• In the event of a fire or moderate fire hazard conditions, follow the 
suppression measures outlined in the Fire Suppression Contingency 
Plan [Section 8.1]. 

• Implement to contingency and management plans that have been 
developed including the Spill Contingency Plan and Fire Suppression 
Contingency Plan [Appendix 1E] 

• Adhere to TransCanada’s Health, Safety and Environment Commitment 
in Section 8.0..  

• Increased demand 
on local emergency, 
protective and 
health care services 
during construction. 

• Potential residual 
effects related to 
accidents and 
malfunctions 
(Section 6.2.20). 

4. Waste 
management 
during 
construction and 
operations 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

RSA • Adhere to the Waste Management Plan [Appendix 1F]. 
• The Contractor will collect all construction debris and other waste 

materials and dispose of daily at an approved facility and in accordance 
with the Waste Management Plan (Appendix 1F) and the Spill 
Contingency Plan (Appendix 1E) unless otherwise authorized by the 
Environmental Inspector(s) [Section 8.1]. 

• Locate temporary toilets at convenient locations on/along the 
construction right-of-way. 

• Ensure the construction site is left in a tidy and organized condition at 
the end of each day.  

• Transport and dispose all wastes in accordance with provincial and 
federal regulatory requirements and local guidelines. 

• Follow criteria and regulations set out by the Workplace Hazardous 
Materials Information System and the Transportation of Dangerous 
Goods. 

• Temporary increase 
in waste flow to 
regional landfill 
sites will occur. 

Notes: 1 LSA = Socio-economic LSA; RSA = Socio-economic RSA. 
 2 Detailed mitigation measures are outlined in the Project-specific EPP (Appendix 1). 
 

6.2.17.4 Significance Evaluation of Potential Residual Effects 

A qualitative assessment was considered the most appropriate method to evaluate the significance of 
potential residual effects on infrastructure and services due to the lack of quantitative data and accepted 
standards, guidelines and social thresholds. This qualitative assessment relied on available research, 
literature and the professional judgment of the assessment team.  

Table 6.2.37 provides a summary of the significance evaluation of potential residual socio-economic effects 
of construction and operations of the Project on infrastructure and services. The rationale used to evaluate 
the significance of each of the residual socio-economic effects is provided below. An evaluation of 
significance is not required for those potential effects where no residual effect is identified. All assessment 
criteria were considered when determining the significance of each residual effect, but the most influential 
criteria were reversibility, magnitude and probability. 

  

 
   

Page 6-127 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
TABLE 6.2.37 

 
CHARACTERIZATION OF POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS FOR 

EVALUATION OF SIGNIFICANCE – INFASTRUCTURE AND SERVICES 

Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
a. Increase in traffic on 

highways and access 
roads during 
construction 

Impact balance: Negative Construction-related equipment, materials and personnel will be transported on 
highways and local roads causing an increase in traffic. 

Spatial boundary: 
Socio-economic RSA 

An increase in traffic will occur on various local roads and highways in the Socio-
economic RSA. 

Duration: Short-term The event causing increased traffic will occur during the construction phase. 
Frequency: Isolated The event causing increased traffic is confined to the construction phase. 
Reversibility: Short-term Increased traffic is limited to the construction phase. 
Magnitude: Medium The proposed mitigation effectively reduces the potential residual effect to a moderate 

modification in the socio-economic environment. 
Probability: High It is likely that Project construction will lead to increased traffic on roads and highways. 
Confidence: High The determination of significance is based on a good understanding of cause-effect 

relationships using data pertinent to the Project area. 
Significance: Not significant  With the implementation of the mitigation measures, the residual effect of increased 

traffic is considered not significant.  
b. Increased demand on 

local emergency, 
protective and health 
care services during 
construction 

Impact balance: Negative There could be increased demand on local emergency services during construction and 
operations of the Project due to a temporary increase in population and in the event of 
an accident or malfunction. 

Spatial boundary: 
Socio-economic RSA 

Emergency, protective and health care services could be drawn from areas in the 
Socio-economic RSA. 

Duration: Short-term The event causing the increased demand on emergency, protective and health care 
services would occur during construction. 

Frequency: Isolated The event causing the increased demand on emergency, protective and health care is 
confined to the construction phase 

Reversibility: Short-term An increased demand on emergency, protective and health care services would be 
limited to the construction phase. 

Magnitude: Medium The proposed mitigation effectively reduces the potential residual effect to a moderate 
modification in the socio-economic environment as the added strain could affect 
existing services.  

Probability: High It is likely that Project construction will lead to an increased demand on local 
emergency, protective and health care services. 

Confidence: Moderate The determination of significance is based on a good understanding of cause-effect 
relationships although there are challenges in predicting if an incident requiring local 
emergency services will occur. 

Significance: Not significant  With the implementation of the mitigation measures, the residual effect of increased 
demand on emergency, protective and health care services during construction in 
considered not significant. 

c. Temporary increase in 
solid and liquid waste 
flow to regional landfills, 
transfer station sites 
during construction 

Impact Balance: Negative The waste flow to solid, liquid and hazardous waste facilities could increase from 
construction waste materials. 

Spatial Boundary: 
Socio-economic RSA 

Waste management facilities are located in the Socio-economic RSA. 

Duration: Short-term The event causing an increase in waste occurs during Project construction.  
Frequency: Isolated The event causing an increase in waste is confined to the construction period. 
Reversibility: Short-term The increase in waste is limited to the construction phase. 

Magnitude: Low The proposed mitigation effectively reduces the potential residual effect to an 
inconvenience or a nuisance. 

Probability: High During construction of the Project, it is likely that waste will be generated, requiring 
disposal. 

Confidence: Moderate Specific landfills and hazardous waste operators to be used for the Project will be 
identified closer to construction and the waste needs of the Project are still being 
determined. 

Significance: Not significant  With the implementation of the mitigation measures, the residual effect of increase in 
waste is considered not significant. 

 

 
   

Page 6-128 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.37  Cont’d 

Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
d. Combined effects of the 

Project on infrastructure 
and services 

Impact Balance: Negative A combination of potential effects may impact infrastructure and services. 
Spatial Boundary: 
Socio-economic RSA 

Infrastructure and services are available in the communities considered in the Socio-
economic RSA. 

Duration: Short-term The event causing the combined effect to infrastructure and services occurs primarily 
during the construction phase. 

Frequency: Isolated  The events causing an increased demand on infrastructure and services are expected 
to be confined to the construction phase.  

Reversibility: Short-term The combined effect on infrastructure and services is limited to the construction phase. 
Magnitude: Low to medium The proposed mitigation effectively reduces the effect to a nuisance or inconvenience 

(low), or a moderate modification of the socio-economic environment. 
Probability: High The combined effects listed are likely to occur. 
Confidence: High The determination of significance is based on a good understanding of cause-effect 

relationships using data pertinent to the Project area. 
Significance: Not significant  With the implementation of the mitigation measures, the combined effect on 

infrastructure and services is considered not significant. 
 

Increased in Traffic on Highways and Access Roads during Construction 
The road transportation system in the Socio-economic RSA is used by residents, tourists and industrial 
users. Local roads, access roads, forestry roads and provincial highways will be used for the transportation 
of workers to the temporary construction camp location, the transportation of workers to and from 
construction sites, and the movement of equipment and supplies. In 2013, an automated traffic recorder 
(ATR) located on Highway 63 at Mariana Lake recorded an average annual daily traffic (AADT) of 4,491 
vehicles, which was an increase of 1,121 vehicles from 2009 (Alberta Transportation 2013, 2014a). The 
highest monthly traffic volumes in 2013 were from May to October (Alberta Transportation 2014a). 

Frequency, timing and duration of traffic interruptions that could arise during construction of the Project are 
difficult to determine at this time. Highway 63 and two existing all-weather roads will be used to access the 
right-of-way and winter roads will be used where all weather roads have not been developed. No road 
closures are anticipated, however, traffic may be temporarily delayed while equipment is moved across 
roadways. Highway 63 will be crossed using an HDD method and will occur during the construction season 
and interruption to traffic is not anticipated. For example, workers could be transported on Highway 63. The 
increase in Project-related traffic during construction could lead to an increase in current traffic levels, traffic 
disruptions, reduce safety and increase traffic accidents, as well as increase noise and emission levels. An 
increase in traffic on highways and local roads during the operations phase is not anticipated due to the 
limited workforce needed to operate the Project. 

Most ground transportation between the construction worker accommodations and the work site is expected 
to be by a combination of buses and crew vans. Road use agreements between NGTL and road permit 
owners will be obtained prior to the commencement of construction in the area for the use of resources or 
private roads.  

It is anticipated that pipe and equipment will be transported using Highway 63. Access to the Project site 
will also occur via Highway 63 and existing industrial and access roads. Highway 63, which is crossed by 
the pipeline at approximately KP 3.5, serves as the major transportation route to oil sands development 
near Fort McMurray and Fort Mackay. The Government of Alberta has committed to upgrading Highway 63 
to improve safety for motorists. Upgrades include the twinning of the highway between Grassland and Fort 
McMurray by fall 2016 (Alberta Transportation 2014b). 

With the implementation of the applicable mitigation, the potential residual effect is considered to be 
reversible in the short-term, medium in magnitude, high in probability and not significant (Table 6.2.37, 
point [a]). 

 
   

Page 6-129 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Increased Demand on Local Emergency, Protective and Health Care Services during 
Construction 
NGTL is committed to constructing the Project in a safe and responsible manner. There are several 
contingency plans, management plans and systems either in place or that will be in place to prevent 
accidents and reduce risk of injury to workers during construction. The plans include the Emergency 
Response, Spill Contingency and Fire Contingency plans. All workers and visitors to the job site will have 
to participate in safety orientation, and upon successful completion, display the valid safety sticker on their 
hardhat before permission to access the job site is granted. Safety issues will be discussed during daily on-
site tailgate meetings. 

Despite these measures and best intentions, incidents during the construction phase may arise in which 
emergency, protective and health care services are required (e.g., ambulance, fire, police and hospital). 
Health care facilities are available in the Socio-economic LSA with Fort McMurray as the nearest community 
providing all of the services necessary to respond to emergency situations that may arise during 
construction of the Project. Depending on the seriousness of the incident, air ambulance services are 
available in Fort McMurray. If an incident does occur, given the extensive implementation of safety and 
mitigation measures, it is expected to be localized. During the construction phase of the Project, an 
increased demand on health care services may occur due to the influx of approximately 450 temporary 
workers in the area; however, an increase in demand on health care services during operations is not 
anticipated. 

Refer to accidents and malfunctions in Section 6.2.20 for more information regarding potential incidents 
that may require emergency services.  

Mitigation measures include to ensure the Contractor has the necessary firefighting equipment on hand 
that is capable of controlling any fire that may occur as a result of their activities, as regulated by the 
provincial regulations and government agencies. With the implementation of applicable mitigation, the 
potential residual effect is reversible in the short-term, medium in magnitude, high in probability and not 
significant (Table 6.2.37, point [b]). 

Temporary Increase in Waste Flow to Regional Landfills and Transfer Station Sites During 
Construction 
NGTL will reduce waste quantities to the lowest levels practical through Project design. During construction, 
the Project is expected to cause a temporary increase in waste flow due to construction waste and the 
waste needs of temporary infrastructure and workspace and the increased population demand associated 
with temporary workers. All waste generated from the Project during construction will be hauled to the 
appropriate landfill sites in the region depending on the type of waste. Any hazardous waste will be disposed 
of according to provincial legislation.  

The nearest solid waste facility to the Project is the RM of Wood Buffalo Landfill located 8.5 km south of 
Fort McMurray. During construction, a temporary increase in waste may occur due to Project activities 
which, in turn, could place increased pressure on nearby waste facilities. Potential effects on waste facilities 
during operations are not anticipated. 

With the implementation of the applicable mitigation, the potential residual effect is considered to be 
reversible in the short-term, medium in magnitude, high in probability and not significant (Table 6.2.37, 
point [c]. 

Combined Effects on Infrastructure and Services 
The following potential residual effects are likely to occur and may act in combination to result in overall 
effects on infrastructure and services during construction of the Project: 

• increase in traffic on highways and access roads during construction; 

• increased demand on local emergency, protective and health care services during 
construction; and 

• temporary increase in waste flow to regional landfills and transfer station sites during 
construction. 

 
   

Page 6-130 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
With the implementation of the applicable mitigation, combined effects on infrastructure and services are 
considered reversible in the short-term, low to medium in magnitude, high in probability and not significant 
(Table 6.2.37, point [d]). 

6.2.17.5 Summary 

As identified in Table 6.2.37, there are no situations for infrastructure and services that meet the criteria of 
a significant socio-economic residual effect. Consequently, the residual effects of construction and 
operations of the Project on infrastructure and services will be not significant. 

6.2.18 Navigation and Navigation Safety 

6.2.18.1 Spatial Boundaries 

The spatial boundaries used in the effects assessment for navigation and navigation safety considered one 
or more of the following areas: 

• a Footprint Study Area (as defined in Section 1.4); 

• a HORU LSA; and 

• a HORU RSA. 

The spatial boundaries associated with the HORU LSA and HORU RSA used for the effects assessment 
for navigation and navigation safety are described under human occupancy and resource use in 
Section 6.2.12. 

6.2.18.2 Navigation and Navigation Safety Context 

This subsection describes the potential Project effects on navigation and navigation safety. This refers to 
the use of watercourses for transportation, whether for recreational, commercial or traditional purposes. 
Given the linear length of the pipeline route, there are numerous navigable watercourses (including 
navigable wetlands) that are crossed by the pipeline route. 

The pipeline route crosses approximately eight watercourses, including fish-bearing drainages/wetlands 
(approximately three which are determined to be navigable based on the minor navigable waters criteria). 
No designated Canadian Heritage Rivers are crossed by the pipeline route (Canadian Heritage Rivers 
System 2011). 

Potentially navigable watercourses crossed by the pipeline route that are listed in Section 5.18 and include: 

• House River;  

• Dropoff Creek; and  

• Unnamed Tributary to Dropoff Creek. 

The types of activities and use on watercourses and wetlands (with an open water component) crossed by 
the pipeline route can include activities such as fishing or canoeing. Vessels and craft used on watercourses 
and wetlands crossed by the pipeline route can include boats, canoes or kayaks. 

6.2.18.3 Potential Effects, Mitigation Measures and Potential Residual Effects 

The potential effects on navigation and navigation safety associated with the construction and operations 
of the Project are listed in Table 6.2.38. A summary of mitigation measures to reduce the severity of the 
potential effects of the Project on navigation and navigation safety are provided in Table 6.2.38. These 
measures were developed in accordance with several industry and regulatory guidelines including 
Transport Canada’s NWPA. In addition, these measures have been considered acceptable by the NEB for 
past pipeline projects including NGTL’s Cutbank River Lateral Loop (Bald Mountain Section) Project, Bear 
River West Lateral Loop Project and Kearl Extension and Sales Meter Station Project (NEB 2010a,b,c). 

 
   

Page 6-131 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
TABLE 6.2.38 

 
POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF 

PROJECT CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS ON NAVIGATION AND NAVIGATION SAFETY 

Potential Effect Component 
Spatial 

Boundary Key Recommendations/Mitigation Measures [EPP Reference]1 
Potential Residual 

Effect(s) 
1. Disruption of 

watercourse 
users on 
navigable 
watercourses 
and wetlands (if 
instream 
activities occur 
during 
non-frozen 
conditions) 

Pipeline LSA • Obtain all necessary licenses and approvals before the 
commencement of construction. The Company, its authorized 
representatives, Contractor(s), and subcontractors, will comply 
with all conditions as presented to the Company on permits, 
approvals, licences, certificates and Project-specific 
management plans. Resolve any inconsistencies between 
permit conditions and contract documents as they arise 
[Section 4.0]. 

• Ensure all notifications are completed in accordance with the 
Code of Practice for Pipelines and Telecommunication Lines 
Crossing a Water Body [Section 8.4]. 

• If directed by the regulatory agency responsible for navigation, 
install warning signs along the banks both upstream and 
downstream of the crossing to caution users of a navigational 
hazard, where appropriate [Section 8.4].  

• Post signs immediately following clearing (including name, 
number and approximate KP) for watercourses and fish-bearing 
drainages. Signs will be posted 100 m from the waterbody or at 
the top of the valley slope, whichever is greater, to alert the 
Contractor of the upcoming watercourse [Section 8.4]. 

• Construct/install all watercourse vehicle crossings as outlined in 
Table 2 and in accordance with the typical drawings 
(Appendix 1D, Dwgs. STDS-03-ML-05-101, STDS-03-ML-05-
102 and STDS-03-ML-05-104). 

• Install and remove any temporary vehicle crossings in a manner 
that protects the banks from erosion and maintain the flows in 
the waterway. These crossings will be returned to their 
preconstruction condition [Section 8.4]. 

• Return the bed and banks of each watercourse as close as 
possible to their original preconstruction contours. Do not realign 
or straighten watercourses or change their hydraulic 
characteristics [Section 8.4]. 

• No residual effect 
identified. 

2. Concern for 
safety of users 
on navigable 
watercourses 
and wetlands (if 
activities occur 
during 
non-frozen 
conditions) 

Pipeline  LSA • If directed by the regulatory agency responsible for navigation, 
install warning signs along the banks both upstream and 
downstream of the crossing to caution users of a navigational 
hazard, where appropriate [Section 8.4].  

• Post signs immediately following clearing (including name, 
number and KP) for watercourses and fish-bearing drainages. 
Signs will be posted 100 m from the waterbody or at the top of 
the valley slope, whichever is greater, to alert the Contractor of 
the upcoming watercourse [Section 8.4]. 

• No residual effect 
identified. 

Notes: 1 LSA = HORU. 
 2 Detailed mitigation measures are outlined in the Project-specific Pipeline EPP (Appendix 1). 
 

6.2.18.4 Summary 

As identified in Table 6.2.38, there are no situations for navigation and navigation safety that would result 
in a significant socio-economic residual effect. Consequently, it is concluded that the potential residual 
socio-economic effect of pipeline construction and operations on navigation and navigation safety were not 
significant. 

 
   

Page 6-132 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
6.2.19 Employment and Economy 

6.2.19.1 Spatial Boundaries 

The spatial boundaries considered for the effects assessment used for employment and economy 
considered one or more of the following areas: 

• a Footprint Study Area (as defined in Section 1.4);  

• a Socio-economic LSA; 

• a Socio-economic RSA; and  

• a National Study Area (as defined in Section 1.4). 

The spatial boundaries associated with the Socio-economic LSA and Socio-economic RSA used for the 
effects assessment for Employment and Economy are described under social and cultural well-being in 
Section 6.2.15. 

6.2.19.2 Employment and Economy Context 

The assessment of potential effects has been conducted considering all Project components in an 
integrated manner (e.g., pipeline, compressor station and access road), since many potential effects are 
related to capital and operational expenditures, regional employment opportunities and 
contracting/procurement approaches, which cannot be meaningfully disaggregated by Project component 
from a community perspective.  

The Project is located in the boundaries of the RM of Wood Buffalo and Lac La Biche County. The economy 
of the area is based on oil and gas, agriculture and forestry.  

In 2011, an estimated 83.3% of the population in the RM of Wood Buffalo participated in the labour force 
and approximately 4.7% of the labour force was unemployed (Statistics Canada 2012). The present 
economy of the RM of Wood Buffalo is characterized by oil sands development with the majority of goods 
and services associated with the oil sands being imported to the region (RM of Wood Buffalo 2010a). While 
the oil sands industry is expected to remain the primary sector, the envisioned economy of the region will 
become more diversified with the region providing more of the goods and services (RM of Wood Buffalo 
2010a). 

In 2011, approximately 70.3% of the population in Lac La Biche County participated in the labour force and 
an estimated 6.4% of the labour force was unemployed. Alberta’s participation rate was 73.2% and the 
provincial unemployment rate was 5.8% during the same year (Statistics Canada 2012). Economic activity 
in Lac La Biche County is primarily based on resource extraction activities including forestry and oil and 
gas development (Lac La Biche County 2013). It is anticipated that steam-assisted gravity drainage (SAGD) 
development for in-site oil sands extraction in the northeast of the county will continue to increase, acting 
as the main economic driver (Lac La Biche County 2013).  

In 2011, approximately 63.7% of the population of the Town of Athabasca participated in the labour force 
and an estimated 7.1% of the labour force were employed (Statistics Canada 2012). The economy of the 
Town of Athabasca is based on agriculture, natural gas, forestry and tourism. Agriculture has typically been 
the main economic driver although its importance has diminished in recent years (Alberta Community 
Profiles 2014). The retail and service sectors in the community have expanded in response to industry 
development in the area. The largest employer in the community is the Athabasca University (Alberta 
Community Profiles 2014).  

6.2.19.3 Potential Effects, Mitigation Measures and Potential Residual Effects 

The potential effects on employment and economy associated with the construction and operations of the 
Project are listed in Table 6.2.39. A summary of mitigation measures to reduce the severity of potential 
effects of the Project on employment and economy are provided in Table 6.2.38. These measures were 

 
   

Page 6-133 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
developed in accordance with several industry and provincial and regulatory guidelines including AENV 
(1994b) and CAPP (1999). In addition, these measures have been considered acceptable by the NEB for 
past pipeline projects including NGTL’s Cutbank River Lateral Loop (Bald Mountain Section) Project, Bear 
River West Lateral Loop Project and Kearl Extension and Sales Meter Station Project (NEB 2010a,b,c). 

TABLE 6.2.39 
 

POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF  
PROJECT CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS ON EMPLOYMENT AND ECONOMY 

Potential Effect Component 
Spatial 

Boundary Recommendations/Mitigation Measures 
Potential 

Residual Effects 
1. Contracting 

and 
procurement 
opportunities 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

RSA • Conduct early consultation with local contractors in affected communities 
regarding business opportunities and procurement practices. 

• Develop and include guidelines related to local hiring in bid packages, which 
will be considered when awarding construction contracts. 

• Provide the opportunity for qualified local contractors to participate in the 
contracting process. 

• Identify qualified Aboriginal-owned companies and provide information for 
potential opportunities. 

• Increased 
contracting 
and 
procurement 
opportunities 
during 
construction 
and sit--
specific 
maintenance. 

2. Employment 
opportunities 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

RSA • Continue to communicate and engage, as required, with local businesses and 
Aboriginal communities to address issues and concerns related to economic 
opportunities. 

• Provide contracting qualification information to Aboriginal communities’ and 
economic development organizations of Project construction and operations 
to explain contracting and employment on the Project.  

• Conduct early consultation with local contractors in affected communities 
regarding business opportunities and procurement practices. 

• Provide guidelines for local hiring in all construction contracts.  
• Communicate with economic development organizations and chambers of 

commerce in advance of Project construction to confirm existing employment 
conditions. 

• Opportunities 
for local and 
regional 
Project-related 
employment 
during 
construction 
and 
site-specific 
maintenance. 

3. Increased tax 
revenue 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

National • Revenue payments by NGTL are considered beneficial by governments. • Increased tax 
revenue.  

Notes: 1 RSA = Socio-economic RSA. 
 2 Detailed mitigation measures are outlined in the Project-specific Pipeline EPP (Appendix 1). 
 

6.2.19.4 Significance Evaluation of Potential Residual Effects 

A qualitative assessment was considered the most appropriate method to evaluate the significance of 
potential residual effects on employment and economy due to the lack of quantitative data and accepted 
standards, guidelines and thresholds. This qualitative assessment relied on available research, literature 
and the professional judgment of the assessment team.  

Table 6.2.40 provides a summary of the significance evaluation of potential residual socio-economic effects 
of construction and operations of the Project on employment and economy. The rationale used to evaluate 
the significance of each of the residual socio-economic effects is provided below. An evaluation of 
significance is not required for those potential effects where no residual effect is identified. All assessment 
criteria were considered when determining the significance of each residual effect, but the most influential 
criteria were reversibility, magnitude and probability. 

  

 
   

Page 6-134 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
TABLE 6.2.40 

 
CHARACTERIZATION OF POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS FOR 

EVALUATION OF SIGNIFICANCE – EMPLOYMENT AND ECONOMY 

Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
a. Increased contracting 

and procurement 
opportunities during 
construction and 
site-specific 
maintenance 

Impact balance: Positive Project-related activities could offer opportunities for contract employment for residents 
and businesses. 

Spatial boundary: 
Socio-Economic RSA 

There will be an effort to ensure local businesses are used during the construction 
phase, even though it is expected that businesses that are not considered local will 
also be used. 

Duration: Short-term The event causing increased contracting and procurement opportunities will largely 
occur during the construction phase or within any 1 year during operations. 

Frequency: Periodic Contracting and procurement opportunities are primarily attributed to the construction 
phase although site-specific maintenance during operations will also provide 
opportunities for local contractors. 

Reversibility: Short-term Increased local contracting and procurement opportunities are limited to the 
construction phase or to less than 1 year during the operations phase. 

Magnitude: Medium The residual effect will result in a detectable change and moderate modification of the 
socio-economic environment. 

Probability: High It is likely that contracts will be awarded, and enhancement measures will be put in 
place to improve opportunities for local businesses. 

Confidence: High The determination of significance is based on a good understanding of cause-effect 
relationships using data pertinent to the Project area. 

Significance: Not significant  The residual effect is anticipated to have a positive impact balance and is therefore 
considered not significant. 

b. Opportunities for local 
and regional Project-
related employment 
during construction and 
site-specific 
maintenance 

Impact balance: Positive Project-related activities could offer employment opportunities for residents in the area. 
Spatial boundary: 
Socio-Economic RSA 

There will be an effort to ensure local employment occurs during the construction 
phase, however, it is expected that people that are not considered local will also be 
hired. 

Duration: Short-term The event causing increased employment opportunities is during construction of the 
Project or within 1 year during operations. 

Frequency: Periodic Employment opportunities are generally limited to the construction phase although site-
specific maintenance activities during operations will also provide employment 
opportunities.  

Reversibility: Short-term The potential residual effect is limited to the construction phase and any 1 year during 
operations. 

Magnitude: Medium The residual effect will result in a detectable change and moderate modification of the 
socio-economic environment. 

Probability: High NGTL and its contractors plan to carry out local and regional hiring for the Project. 
Confidence: High The determination of significance is based on a good understanding of employment 

opportunities in the area and existing relationships NGTL has maintained with local 
workers as a result. 

Significance: Not significant  The residual effect is anticipated to have a positive impact balance and is therefore 
considered not significant. 

c. Increased tax revenue  Impact balance: Positive Regional, provincial and federal tax revenue will increase as a result of the Project. 
Spatial boundary: National Increased tax revenues will be distributed at local, provincial and national levels. 
Duration: Long-term The presence of the pipeline during construction and operations will generate 

government revenues.  
Frequency: Continuous The event (i.e., the presence of the pipeline) causing increased tax revenue will occur 

continually over the assessment period. 
Reversibility: Long-term Increased tax revenues will persist throughout construction and operations. 
Magnitude: Low The revenue generated is not anticipated to be substantial when compared to other 

sources of provincial and federal revenue. 
Probability: High Taxes will be generated for the life of the Project.  
Confidence: High The determination of significance is based on a good understanding of cause-effect 

relationships using data pertinent to the Project area. 
Significance: Not significant The residual effect is anticipated to have a positive impact balance and is therefore 

considered not significant. 
d. Combined effects on 

employment and 
economy  

Impact balance: Neutral The combined effects on employment and economy all have either a neutral or positive 
impact balance. 

Spatial boundary: National Increased tax revenues will be distributed at provincial and national levels. 
Duration: Long-term The presence of the pipeline during construction and operations will result in combined 

effects. 
 

 
   

Page 6-135 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.40  Cont’d 

Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
d. Combined effects on 

employment and 
economy (cont’d) 

Frequency: Continuous The event (i.e., the presence of the pipeline) causing increased tax revenue will occur 
continually over the assessment period. 

Reversibility: Long-term Combined effects on employment and economy will extend throughout the operations 
phase. 

Magnitude: Low The combination of negative and positive residual effects will result in a detectable 
change but has no effect on the socio-economic environment beyond that of an 
inconvenience or nuisance. 

Probability: High Combined effects on employment and economy are likely to occur. 
Confidence: High The determination of significance is based on a good understanding of cause-effect 

relationships using data pertinent to the Project area. 
Significance: Not significant The combined effects are expected to have a neutral impact balance and are therefore 

considered not significant. 
 

Increased Contracting and Procurement Opportunities during Construction and Site-Specific 
Maintenance 
The Project will generate a demand for goods and services through direct and indirect opportunities 
primarily during construction but also as a result of site-specific maintenance during operations. Examples 
of direct contractor opportunities for the Project include project management, construction management, 
office administration, safety inspection, welding inspection and general inspection. Direct subcontracting 
opportunities related to construction activities include right-of-way and facility clearing, road access 
clearing, water hauling, HDD/boring, security services and emergency medical services. 

Local businesses that could benefit indirectly from contract opportunities and goods and service provisions 
include restaurants, lodgings, cleaners, fuel stations and trucking, catering and waste service providers. 
Local businesses including accommodation, restaurants, local services stations and recreational facilities 
may also benefit indirectly during construction and site-specific maintenance of the Project. 

NGTL encourages local participation and job training through the partnering of supplier and vendors who 
have established local hiring and job training programs (such as PTI Group’s job and training program). 
Mitigation measures include beginning early consultation with local contractors in affected communities 
regarding business opportunities and procurement practices; continue after the selection of the prime 
construction contractor; and preparing a database of qualified contractors and businesses, including 
Aboriginal contractors and businesses that can provide services related to Project construction. Provide 
these contacts to prime contractors to use during the tendering process.  

The residual effect is considered to be reversible in the short-term, medium in magnitude, high in probability 
and not significant (Table 6.2.40, point [a]). 

Opportunities for Local and Regional Project-related Employment during Construction and 
Site-Specific Maintenance 
Construction of the Project will direct and indirect employment opportunities. Construction contracting 
opportunities will be provided to qualified competitive local businesses, wherever feasible. The impact 
balance of this residual effect is positive. Reversibility for positive effects is not considered. Due to the 
number of communities likely involved in the construction, the residual effect is reversible in the short-term, 
medium in magnitude, high in probability and considered to be not significant (Table 6.2.40, point [b]).  

Increased Tax Revenue  
Construction of the Project will generate a demand for goods, services and workers. There will be direct 
and indirect business income and direct and indirect employment income. There will also be increased tax 
revenues for provincial and federal governments during construction and operations. The residual effect is 
considered to be reversible in the long-term, low in magnitude, high in probability and not significant 
(Table 6.2.40, point [c]). 

 
   

Page 6-136 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Combined Effects on Employment and Economy 
The following potential residual effects are likely to occur and may act in combination to result in overall 
effects on employment and economy during construction and operations of the Project: 

• increased contracting and procurement activities during construction and site-specific 
maintenance; 

• opportunities for local and regional Project-related employment during construction and 
site-specific maintenance; and 

• increased tax revenue. 

With the implementation of the applicable mitigation presented in Section 6.2.37, combined effects on 
infrastructure and services are considered reversible in the long-term, low in magnitude, high in probability 
and not significant (Table 6.2.40, point [d]). 

6.2.19.5 Summary 

As identified in Table 6.2.40, there are no situations for infrastructure and services that meet the criteria of 
a significant socio-economic residual effect. Consequently, the residual effects of construction and 
operations of the Project on employment and economy will be not significant. 

6.2.20 Accidents and Malfunctions 

6.2.20.1 Spatial Boundaries 

The spatial boundaries considered for the following effects assessment considered the applicable biological 
or socio-economic element LSA or Socio-economic RSA. These spatial boundaries are described in 
Sections 6.2.7, 6.2.8, 6.2.9, 6.2.10, 6.2.11, 6.2.14, 6.2.16 and 6.2.17. 

6.2.20.2 Potential Effects, Mitigation Measures and Potential Residual Effects 

Accidents and malfunctions are unplanned events that could result in significant adverse effects to human 
health, property or the environment, but are unlikely to occur. While accidents and malfunctions are 
predicted to be unlikely for the Project, the potential consequences are evaluated so that emergency 
response and contingency planning can be identified to ensure the risk is further mitigated. 

Potential effects associated with the accidents and malfunctions during construction and operations of the 
Project were identified by the assessment team and are listed in Table 6.2.41. 

A summary of mitigation measures to reduce the severity of potential effects of the Project as a result of an 
accident or malfunction have been incorporated into Table 6.2.41. These measures were developed in 
accordance with NGTL standards as well as industry and provincial regulatory guidelines including AENV 
(1988, 1994a) and CAPP (1999). In addition, these measures have been considered acceptable by the 
NEB for past pipeline projects by NGTL (NEB 2010a,b).  

  

 
   

Page 6-137 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
TABLE 6.2.41 

 
POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF 

ACCIDENTS AND MALFUNCTIONS DURING PROJECT CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS 

Potential Effect 
Project 

Component 
Spatial 

Boundary 
Key Recommendations/Mitigation Measures 

[EPP Reference]1 
Potential Residual 

Effect(s) 
1. Spill of hazardous 

materials during 
construction and 
maintenance 
activities 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

Wildlife LSA; 
Aquatics LSA;  
Wetlands LSA; 
Vegetation LSA; 
HORU LSA  

Spill Prevention 
• Bulk fuel trucks, service vehicles, and pick-up trucks equipped 

with box-mounted fuel tanks shall carry spill prevention, 
containment, and clean-up materials that are suitable for the 
volume of fuels or oils carried. Spill contingency material carried 
on bulk fuel and service vehicles shall be suitable for use on land 
and water [Section 8.1]. 

• Do not allow fuel, oil, or hazardous material storage within 100 m 
of a watercourse or waterbody except where secondary 
containment is provided [Section 8.1]. 

• Equipment to be used in or adjacent to a watercourse or 
waterbody  will be clean or otherwise free of external grease, oil 
or other fluids, mud, soil and vegetation, prior to entering the 
waterbody.[Section 8.1]. 

In the Event of a Spill 
• The Environmental Inspector will report any spills in accordance 

with federal and/or provincial regulations and advising Company 
management on the clean-up and disposal of the material and 
any affected soils or vegetation [Section 4.0]. 

• In the event of a spill, refer to the Spill Contingency Plan 
[Appendix 1E]. 

• Clean up and document spill in accordance with the NEB 
Remediation Process Guide (NEB 2011). 

• Inadvertent spills 
could result in 
contamination. 

• No residual effects 
identified for soil and 
soil productivity due 
to effectiveness of 
clean-up measures. 

2. Fire during 
construction and 
operations 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

Wildlife RSA; 
Vegetation LSA;  
Socio-economic 
LSA 

Fire Prevention 
• Ensure that personnel are made aware of the proper disposal 

methods for welding rods, cigarette butts and other hot or burning 
material [Section 8.1]. 

• Smoke only within designated areas [Section 8.1].  
• Obtain applicable permits prior to burning slash. Follow guidance 

in the applicable regulations (Alberta Reg. 310/72) [Section 8.2]. 
• In the event of a fire or high fire hazard conditions, follow the 

suppression measures of the Fire Suppression Contingency Plan 
[Appendix 1E] [Section 8.1]. 

In the Event of a Fire 
• Follow the fire suppression measures of the Fire Suppression 

Contingency Plan [Appendix 1E]. 
Fire During Operations 
• Implement the above procedures, as applicable, to operation and 

maintenance activities. 
• Design the Project to limit the potential for and volume of a 

product release that could result in a fire in the event of a pipeline 
leak or rupture during operations. 

• During operation and maintenance, implement a combination of 
incident prevention measures, safety devices and procedures 
under NGTL’s Emergency Management System to ensure public 
safety and prevent environmental damage. 

• Despite vigilance, 
fires may adversely 
affect adjacent 
vegetation and, in 
very rare situations, 
affect wildlife and 
adjacent property 

3. Damage to 
foreign utilities 
during 
construction and 
operations 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

Aquatics RSA; 
Socio-economic 
RSA  

• Mark and locate all foreign lines and cables using One-Call 
services before the start of construction to ensure the safety of 
the workers and public [Section 6.0]. 

• Conduct construction activities in the vicinity of adjacent pipelines 
in compliance with all requirements of CSA Z662-11 and the NEB 
OPRs for work close to an operating pipeline. 

• Damage to utility 
lines could lead to 
interruption of 
services, 
contamination of 
water depending on 
the location and 
severity of the 
rupture, and fires in 
the case of gas. 

 

 
   

Page 6-138 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.41  Cont'd 

Potential Effect 
Project 

Component 
Spatial 

Boundary 
Key Recommendations/Mitigation Measures 

[EPP Reference]1 
Potential Residual 

Effect(s) 
4. Transportation 

accidents 
Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

Wildlife RSA; 
Socio-economic 
RSA 

• Where practical, use multi-passenger vehicles for the transport of 
crews to and from job sites. [Section 8.1]. 

• Implement the Traffic Control Management Plan and 
TransCanada’s Contractor Drug and Alcohol Policy. 

• A transportation 
accident may cause 
injury to wildlife or 
may result in fire or 
contamination of 
lands and water 
depending on the 
location and severity 
of the accident. 

5. Accidental drilling 
mud release  

Pipeline Aquatics RSA • Develop an emergency response plan that will be implemented in 
the event of sediment releases or spills of deleterious substances 
during the construction of the trenchless crossings [Section 8.4]. 

• In the event of sediment releases or spills of deleterious 
substances during the construction of the trenchless crossings 
implement the Directional Drilling Procedures and Instream 
Drilling Mud Release Contingency Plan (Appendix 1E) 
[Section 8.4]. 

• Refer to water and water quality, Table 6.2.6 and fish and fish 
habitat, Table 6.2.16 for additional mitigation and monitoring 
measures regarding drilling mud releases during construction. 

• Effects on surface 
water quality are 
addressed in water 
quality and quantity 
in Section 6.2.3. 

• Effects on fish and 
fish habitat are 
addressed in 
Section 6.2.7. 

Note: 1 Detailed mitigation measures noted are outlined in the Project-specific EPP (Appendix 1). 
 

6.2.20.3 Significance Evaluation of Potential Residual Effects 

A qualitative assessment was considered the most appropriate method to evaluate the significance of 
potential residual effects of accidents and malfunctions, due to the lack of quantitative data and accepted 
standards, guidelines and ecological thresholds given the scope of the Project. 

Table 6.2.42 provides a summary of the significance evaluation of the potential residual environmental 
effects associated with accidents and malfunctions during the construction and operations of the Project. 
The rationale used to evaluate the significance of each of the residual environmental effects is provided 
below.  

TABLE 6.2.42 
 

CHARACTERIZATION OF POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS FOR 
EVALUATION OF SIGNIFICANCE – ACCIDENTS AND MALFUNCTIONS 

Potential Residual 
Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 

a. Inadvertent spills 
could result in 
contamination  

Impact balance: Negative Surface water or groundwater quality, aquatic habitat, wetlands, vegetation, wildlife habitat and the 
health of local residents could be impacted from a spill during construction. 

Spatial boundary: Various 
element boundaries (see 
Table 6.2.41) 

Contaminants resulting from accidental spills may be confined to the location of the incident within 
terrestrial habitat or aquatic habitat, wetlands and on vegetation subsequently transported. 

Duration: Immediate The event is a spill, the period of which is less than 1 day. 
Frequency: Accidental A spill causing contamination is rare during construction and operations. 
Reversibility: Short to 
Medium-Term 

Depending on the size of the spill. 

Magnitude: Low to High Depending on the volume, location and contaminants released. 
Probability: Low Due to mitigation measures in place to reduce the potential for spills and the emergency response 

measures to contain and clean up product. 
Confidence: Moderate Based on the professional experience of the assessment team. 
Significance: Not 
Significant  

There are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of a permanent or long-
term effect of high magnitude that cannot be mitigated. 

 

 
   

Page 6-139 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 6.2.42  Cont’d 

Potential Residual 
Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 

b. Despite vigilance, 
a fire can occur 
during 
construction or 
operations 

Impact balance: Negative A fire occurring during construction or operations may affect habitat features, vegetation or 
structures in the Wildlife RSA, Vegetation LSA or the Socio-Economic LSA. 

Spatial boundary: Wildlife 
RSA, Vegetation LSA and/or 
Socio-Economic LSA 

Accidental fires could vary in size depending on the circumstances (e.g., location, weather, level of 
preparation) and would generally be confined to the Wildlife LSA or Vegetation LSA, however, in 
exceptional circumstances could extend beyond the LSA to the RSA or even to the Socio-
economic LSA, if property is damaged. 

Duration: Immediate The event causing effects on adjacent habitat or human property is a fire, the period of which is 
generally less than or equal to 2 days. 

Frequency: Accidental Fires resulting from construction or operations activities are rare. 
Reversibility: Medium to 
Long-Term 

Affected habitat or vegetation may take up to or longer than 10 years to recover from a fire 
depending on the species composition (i.e., shorter for shrubs and grasses, longer for trees). 
Replacing a structure damaged by fire may also take longer than 10 years. 

Magnitude: Low to High Depending on the size and location of the fire, and the sensitivity of the habitat affected. 
Probability: Low It is unlikely that a fire will occur. 
Confidence: Moderate Based on the professional experience of the assessment team. 
Significance: Not 
Significant  

There are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of a permanent or long-term 
effect of high magnitude that cannot be mitigated. 

c. Damage to 
foreign utilities 
during 
construction and 
operations 

Impact balance: Negative Damage to utility lines during construction will negatively interrupt services, cause contamination 
or cause a fire.  

Spatial boundary: Aquatics 
RSA and/or Socio-Economic 
RSA 

The effects resulting from accidental ruptures of water lines or foreign pipelines range from small 
terrestrial spills (Footprint) to contamination of surface or groundwater (Aquatics RSA) to large 
fires (Wildlife and Socio-economic RSA), depending on the product in the line. 

Duration: Immediate The event causing a rupture or damage to utility lines is an accident, the period of which is less 
than or equal to 2 days. 

Frequency: Accidental Rupture of or damage to utility lines during construction is rare. 
Reversibility: Immediate to 
Short-Term 

Depending on the length of time needed for clean-up and reclamation of the residual effect caused 
by damage to or rupture of a utility line. 

Magnitude: Low to High Depending on the type and location of the utility line as well as the sensitivity of habitats affected 
by the ruptured utility line. 

Probability: Low It is unlikely that a rupture or damage to a utility line will occur. 
Confidence: Moderate Based on the professional experience of the assessment team. 
Significance: Not 
Significant  

There are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of a permanent or long-term 
effect of high magnitude that cannot be mitigated. 

d. Transportation 
accidents during 
construction 

Impact balance: Negative Transportation accidents may results in potential effects to humans and wildlife or cause 
contamination.  

Spatial boundary: Wildlife 
RSA and/or Socio-economic 
RSA 

Transportation accidents during construction activities may result from commuting to and from the 
work site. 

Duration: Immediate The event causing potential injury to wildlife is a transportation accident, the period of which is less 
than 1 day. 

Frequency: Accidental Transportation accidents during construction and any associated residual effects are rare. 
Reversibility: Immediate to 
permanent 

Some accidents may result in minor injuries to people or wildlife (immediate), while others could 
cause permanent injury or death to people or wildlife (permanent). 

Magnitude: Low to High Depending on the type and severity of effects associated with the outcome of a transportation 
accident. 

Probability: High It is unlikely that a transportation accident will occur. 
Confidence: Moderate Based on the professional experience of the assessment team. 
Significance: Not 
Significant  

There are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of a permanent or long-term 
effect of high magnitude that cannot be mitigated. 

Note: Significant Residual Environmental Effect: A high probability of occurrence of a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot 
be technically or economically mitigated. 

 

Spills or Contamination During Construction or Operations 

Surface and Ground Water Quality 
Surface water or groundwater quality could be impacted from a spill during construction. The severity of the 
impact would depend on the size and location of the spill. However, pipeline spill statistics demonstrate that 
 

   
Page 6-140 

 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
the probability of a significant adverse residual effect is low. As discussed in Section 6.2.3, contamination 
of an aquifer may result if the spilled material migrates through the developed soil near the surface through 
the surficial materials into the first water-bearing unit. The rate of migration is dependent upon the 
permeability of the materials, presence or absence of fractures, the properties of the spilled contaminant 
(density, viscosity) and the vertical hydraulic gradients. A spill during the construction phase of the Project 
is likely to be noted quickly and be of small volume, and evidence suggests that the effects of most minor 
spills are localized. With the implementation of the spill prevention (i.e., not storing fuel, oil or other 
hazardous materials within 100 m of a watercourse or waterbody) and response measures (e.g., Spill 
Contingency Plan in Appendix 1 of the EPP) and clean-up and remediation measures, a spill potentially 
affecting surface or groundwater is considered to be of low to high magnitude and reversible in the short to 
medium-term. The probability of a spill contaminating groundwater or surface water is low (Table 6.2.42, 
point [a]).  

Aquatic and Terrestrial Habitat 
Spills during construction could potentially contaminate or otherwise alter aquatic habitat (i.e., instream fish 
habitat, wetlands) or terrestrial habitat (i.e., riparian fish and wildlife habitat, upland wildlife habitat, 
vegetation habitat, wetland habitat). Depending on the severity and location of the spill, residual effects are 
expected to be reversible in the short-term (e.g., small terrestrial spill that affects only herbaceous 
vegetation) to long-term (e.g., spill affecting forested wildlife habitat and may require clearing to effectively 
clean up and reclaim the site; cleared habitat can regenerate in the long-term). Similarly, the magnitude of 
residual effects of spills on habitat varies depending on the severity of the event and the habitat affected. 
For example, in the event of a spill such as a fuel truck rollover in a stream with high quality fish habitat, the 
adverse residual effects could be of high magnitude with long lasting ramifications to the health of the 
stream. With the implementation of spill prevention and response measures, events such as this rarely 
occur and even more rarely occur instream or where other sensitive habitats exist (e.g., rare plant 
populations or habitat features important for wildlife species of concern). Therefore, the probability of the 
effect is low (Table 6.2.42 point [a]).  

Wetlands 
In the unlikely event of a major fuel spill from equipment or a fuel truck near a waterbody, infiltration into 
surficial deposits and surface water is possible and the effects would be considered to have a negative 
impact balance. However, construction through wetlands will take place during late summary and fall 
conditions when, consequently, the amount of surface water encountered will be reduced and the speed of 
migration of any spill into the groundwater will be limited. The implementation of preventative measures 
(Table 6.2.18) is expected to mitigate spot spills in wetlands. Spill mitigation is expected to result in some 
loss or disturbance of soil, peat and vegetation. With mitigation measures as well as the design of the 
pipeline and safety measures implemented to prevent a release during operations, the likelihood of a 
product release affecting wetlands is considered unlikely. Therefore, the probability of the effect is low 
(Table 6.2.42 point [a]). 

Vegetation 
Depending on the location and volume, disturbance of vegetation could occur as a result of a spill and 
associated clean-up and reclamation activities. Due to the unpredictability of a spill, mitigation measures 
that are typically implemented to prevent disturbance to vegetation would not be practical. The magnitude 
of this effect would vary depending on the severity of the spill or release, the location of the event, and the 
plant species or ecological community affected (e.g., the magnitude would be higher if a rare plant 
occurrence or rare ecological community is disturbed). Therefore, the magnitude of the residual effect 
associated with a spill or fire that would result in the loss of rare plant or ecological community would 
potentially be low to high. However, the probability of such an event occurring is low. Therefore, the 
probability of the effect is low (Table 6.2.42 point [a]). 

Human Health 
Accidental spills or contamination during construction would be contained and cleaned up in consultation 
with appropriate authorities. The implementation of spill prevention and response measures outlined in 
Table 6.2.34 as well as clean-up and remediation measures would reduce the probability of contamination.  

 
   

Page 6-141 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
With the implementation of the mitigation, the potential residual effect is considered to be reversible in the 
short to medium-term, low to high in magnitude, low in probability and not significant (Table 6.2.42, 
point [a]). 

Fire During Construction or Operations 
Accidental fires during construction or operations can potentially affect vegetation, wildlife habitat, 
infrastructure and services and human health); however, the significance of a fire will depend greatly on the 
size and what it consumes. Since small fires within the Footprint and off of the Footprint are of minor and 
moderate concern respectively, and can be extinguished quickly, they are not likely to cause a significant 
adverse residual effect. Large fires that spread off the Footprint are likely to be considered a significant 
adverse residual effect. With the implementation of mitigation measures (e.g., construction crews having 
fire-fighting equipment and training) and the development of a Fire Contingency Plan (Appendix 1), the 
probability of large fires developing is low (Table 6.2.42, point [b]). 

Damage to Utility Lines Could Lead to Interruption of Services and Fires in the Case of Gas 
Damage to a water line, buried cable or telephone line may be inconvenient however, the adverse residual 
effects would likely be of low magnitude, and reversible in the immediate to short-term since repair would 
be relatively easy. 

In the event of a rupture of a high-pressure gas line, the risk of explosion and risk to human health could 
be considered significant. Since high-pressure pipelines are easily located (as opposed to some low 
pressure plastic distribution lines) and are of sufficient size and strength that rupture is extremely unlikely, 
the probability of a significant adverse effect resulting from an explosion of existing gas pipelines is low. 

Rupture of a foreign pipeline during construction resulting in severe contamination to air or water, or loss 
of vegetation (in the event of explosion or fire) could be considered a significant adverse effect. Since NGTL 
will be adhering to industry standards, regulations and company protocols, the probability of a significant 
adverse effect resulting from working in the vicinity of foreign pipelines is low (Table 6.2.42, point [c]). 

Transportation Accidents During Construction 
A transportation accident arising from increased traffic on major roads associated with construction of the 
Project would likely be considered a significant adverse residual effect if the accident resulted in serious 
injury to humans, death to a wildlife species of concern, damage to property or critical habitat from a fire or 
severe contamination of lands or water. However, the probability of a vehicle accident having a significant 
effect is low (Table 6.2.42 point [d]). 

Combined Effects Resulting from Accidents and Malfunctions 
An evaluation of the combined effects considers those residual effects that are likely to occur. Since the 
probability of an accident or malfunction is low, an evaluation of combined effects of the construction and 
operations of the Project arising from accidents and malfunctions is not warranted. 

6.2.20.4 Summary 

As identified in Table 6.2.42 there are no situations with regard to accidents and malfunctions where there 
is a high probability of occurrence of a permanent or long-term residual environmental effect of high 
magnitude. Consequently, it is concluded that the residual environmental effects arising from an accident 
or malfunction during construction and operations for the pipeline will be not significant. 

6.3 Effects Assessment - Temporary Infrastructure and Workspace During 
Construction 

The following temporary infrastructure and workspace will be required during the construction of the Project: 

• temporary construction workspace, shoo-flies, log decks, material storage, staging area, 
construction office site(s) and camps, etc.; 

 
   

Page 6-142 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
• temporary equipment and fuel storage sites; 

• temporary access roads and borrow pits; 

• temporary bridges;  

• material and pipe stockpile sites; and  

The need for and the respective general location of these sites are the responsibility of the pipeline 
construction Contractor. However, all additional temporary infrastructure and workspace site locations 
during construction will require the approval of the Environmental Inspector(s) and Construction Manager 
before disturbance. 

The evaluation of potential temporary infrastructure, workspace sites and construction offices and camps, 
will be conducted as far in advance of its intended use as practical in order to allow an adequate time to 
choose and evaluate any alternate sites. In the event that specific mitigation is warranted for the site, the 
measures developed will be documented in the first year PCM report (see Section 9.0). General provisions 
will be included in the contract documents that commit Contractors to site protection/restoration measures 
at sites identified, evaluated and used during the construction program. Mitigation measures to be used at 
temporary infrastructure and workspace sites will be as described in Section 6.2. All applicable land users 
as well as municipal, provincial and federal government approvals for the temporary infrastructure and 
workspace site will be acquired prior to use of the site or area. The level of mitigation applied will ensure 
that any adverse residual environmental effects associated with the temporary infrastructure and 
workspace for construction are reduced to a level that is not significant. 

6.4 Effects Assessment - Decommissioning or Abandonment 

The NEB defines decommissioning as the permanent cessation of the operations of a pipeline or facility 
such that cessation does not result in the discontinuance of service, while abandonment is defined as the 
permanent cessation of the operations of a pipeline or facility such that the cessation results in the 
discontinuance of service. 

It is difficult at this time to predict when or how the pipelines and facilities will be decommissioned or 
abandoned at the end of the Project's useful life. However, it can be anticipated that any of the following 
three scenarios may occur during pipeline decommissioning or abandonment: pipeline removal, 
abandonment-in-place or a combination of abandonment-in-place and pipeline removal. Decommissioning 
or abandonment of the proposed Leismer East Compressor Station is anticipated to include, at minimum, 
dismantling and removing of surface facilities and reclaiming the sites to as close to pre-disturbance 
condition as practical. These methods would have to be considered in light of conditions that might prevail 
at the time of decommissioning or abandonment.  

The Project has been designed to operate for approximately 40 years. At the time of decommissioning or 
abandonment of the Project, it is expected that NGTL will review and consider current options, issues and 
regulatory requirements, in consultation with stakeholders having an interest in the proposed works. 
Decommissioning or abandonment activities will comply with all applicable regulatory requirements. 
Any decommissioning or abandonment activities will require the approval of the NEB and other applicable 
agencies. These approvals will be applied for at the time of decommissioning or abandonment planning. 

6.5 Effects of the Environment on the Project 

NGTL has been operating a pipeline system and associated facilities throughout Canada for several years 
and is aware of the normal environmental conditions experienced along the pipeline route and at the 
proposed compressor station location. This knowledge is reflected in the engineering design and mitigation 
measures proposed to address these environmental conditions. 

6.5.1 Environmental Conditions Not Considered 

The following environmental conditions were not considered to have the potential to adversely affect the 
Project either during construction or operations or both: 

 
   

Page 6-143 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
• slumping; 

• severe weather events including high wind speeds (e.g., from tornadoes), heavy or 
persistent precipitation (e.g., from storms, tornadoes) or extreme temperatures, lightning 
and temperature inversions; and 

• seismic activity. 

6.5.1.1 Slumping 

Engineering and design of the Project has taken into consideration the potential for slumping. During 
construction, trench breakers and/or diversion berms will be installed at select locations along the pipeline 
route to control subsurface and surface water flow. These measures are designed to direct water off of the 
proposed right-of-way, thereby reducing the potential for erosion and sudden mass movements of soil. 
Other mitigation measures will be implemented where the potential for localized terrain instability exists 
(Section 6.2.1). Areas of potential terrain instability will be monitored through regular aerial patrols during 
pipeline operations and remedial action will be promptly conducted, where warranted.  

6.5.1.2 Severe Weather 

High Winds 
High winds could result in the suspension of some construction activities such as stripping salvage, clearing, 
slash burning and welding. The buried pipeline will not be adversely affected by high winds and the 
proposed compressor station has been designed to withstand high winds. Consequently, no adverse effects 
on the Project infrastructure are anticipated due to wind, regardless of the wind direction. 

Inclement Weather 
Heavy or persistent precipitation could result in the delay of Project construction if strippings salvage 
activities have not been completed before extreme cold conditions, if thawed soil conditions create safety 
or traffic-related problems or cold temperatures create safety hazards for workers. However, delays in 
construction due to severe weather conditions, are generally expected to be short in duration. 

During the operations phase, heavy or persistent precipitation or extreme temperatures are not anticipated 
to adversely affect the pipelines (when buried). 

Lightning 
Lightning has the potential to impact the power supply and damage above ground equipment and buildings. 
However, no new aboveground facilities are associated with the Project and, consequently, no adverse 
environmental effects on the Project are anticipated to result from lightning. 

Seismic Activity 
Seismic activity has the potential to impact the integrity of the pipelines during the operations phase of the 
Project. However, as stated in Section 5.0, the seismic hazard is low on lands crossed by the Project and 
no adverse effects on the Project are anticipated to result from seismic activity. 

6.5.1.3 Potential Effects, Mitigation Measures and Potential Residual Effects 

As stated in Section 6.2, environmental conditions may have other effects on the Project. The following 
environmental conditions were considered to have the potential to adversely affect the Project either during 
construction or operations or both: 

• flooding; 

• forest fires; and 

• changing weather trends. 

 
   

Page 6-144 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Table 6.5.1 summarizes these potential environmental conditions and provides measures to reduce the 
severity of the potential effects on the Project. 

TABLE 6.5.1 
 

POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND  
RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF THE CHANGES TO THE ENVIRONMENT CAUSED BY THE PROJECT 

Potential Effect Component 
Spatial 

Boundary 
Recommendations/Mitigation Measures  

[EPP Reference]1 
Potential Residual 

Effect(s) 
1. Loss of depth of 

cover due to 
flooding and 
erosion 

Watercourses Aquatics LSA • Construct watercourse crossings during periods of low flow 
in order to reduce the risk of encountering high flows and 
flooded low areas during construction, where feasible. 

• Implement the Flood and Excessive Flow Contingency Plan 
if excessive flows (i.e., greater than the seasonally normal 
expected flow range based on existing and predicted flow 
data) are anticipated at trenched crossings, or if excessive 
flow or flood conditions should occur during watercourse 
crossing construction [Appendix 1E]. 

• Ensure pipeline burial depths at watercourses have taken 
into consideration flood events and scouring of the bed so 
that risk to the integrity of the pipeline due to such events is 
minimal. 

• See mitigation measures pertaining to the alteration of 
riparian habitat as a result of flooding or excessive flows in 
Section 6.2.7 fish and fish habitat. 

• Monitor pipeline depth of cover within watercourses 
throughout the life of the pipeline. Complete remedial work 
where warranted to protect pipeline integrity [Dwg. STDS-03-
ML-03-101]. 

• Loss of cover 
over the pipelines 
may occur at 
localized areas 
as a result of an 
extreme flood 
event. 

2. Wildfire Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

Vegetation 
LSA 

• Ensure appropriate and effective procedures and materials 
are in place in the event of a wildfire during construction. 
Implement the Fire Suppression Contingency Plan 
[Appendix 1E]. 

• See Section 6.2.20 accidents and malfunctions for mitigation 
measures regarding fire caused by Project construction 
activities. 

• Depending on the 
severity, a 
wildfire could 
affect the 
construction 
schedule. 

3. Changing 
weather trends 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

Aquatics LSA • Consider the changes to weather trends (e.g., snow pack 
conditions, timing and intensity of runoff and discharge within 
watercourses, amount of rainfall) within the Project area 
when scheduling maintenance activities along the proposed 
right-of-way. 

• Understand the relationship between climatic parameters 
and the spread of pests that may affect vegetation, such as 
MPB, and undertake appropriate protection measures to 
dispose of slash during maintenance activities as directed by 
the appropriate authority. 

• Depending on the 
type and severity 
of the change in 
weather trends, 
the scheduling of 
maintenance 
activities may be 
affected. 

Note: 1 Detailed mitigation measures are outlined in the Project-specific EPP (Appendix 1). 
 

6.5.1.4 Significance Evaluation of Potential Residual Effects 

Table 6.5.2 provides a summary of the significance evaluation of potential residual effects of the 
environment on the construction and operations of the Project. The rationale used to evaluate the 
significance of each of the residual effects is provided below. 

  

 
   

Page 6-145 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
TABLE 6.5.2 

 
CHARACTERIZATION OF POTENTIAL RESIDUAL  

EFFECTS FOR EVALUATION OF SIGNIFICANCE – EFFECTS OF THE  
ENVIRONMENT ON THE CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS OF THE PROJECT 

Potential Residual Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
a. Loss of cover over the 

pipelines at localized 
areas as a result of an 
extreme flood event 

Impact balance: Negative An extreme flood event may cause loss of cover or depth of cover over the pipeline.  
Spatial boundary: Aquatics LSA Disturbance associated with the loss of cover or depth of cover over the pipeline as a 

result of an extreme flood event may extend beyond the construction right-of-way. 
Duration: Immediate to 
Short-Term 

The event causing the loss of cover (i.e., extreme flood event) likely will last less than 
1 week. 

Frequency: Accidental An extreme flood event is rare. 
Reversibility: Short-Term Disturbance associated with flooding as a result of an extreme storm event may take 

greater than 2 days however, less than a year to reverse the effect. 
Magnitude: Medium Although the implementation of the proposed mitigation measures is expected to 

reduce the loss of cover or depth of cover, the residual effect may be approaching the 
general acceptability for resource managers, depending on the severity of the loss. 

Probability: Low It is unlikely that an extreme flood event will occur that would result in a loss of cover 
or depth of cover over the pipeline, exceed the capacity of isolation equipment or 
erode onshore spoil piles. 

Confidence: High Based on the experience of the assessment team. 
Significance: Not Significant  There are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of a permanent 

or long-term effect of high magnitude that cannot be mitigated. 
b. Depending on the 

severity, a wildfire could 
affect the construction 
schedule 

Impact balance: Negative A wildfire will negatively impact the construction schedule.  
Spatial boundary: Vegetation 
LSA 

A wildfire in the Vegetation LSA could affect access to the construction right-of-way 
and, consequently, the construction schedule. 

Duration: Immediate to 
Short-Term 

The event affecting the construction schedule (i.e., wildfire) may take more than 
2 days to control, depending on the severity of the fire. 

Frequency: Accidental A wildlife is considered rare, especially in the fall and winter when pipeline 
construction activities are anticipated to occur.  

Reversibility: Short-Term It is likely that construction activities that were shut-down due to a wildfire would 
resume within a year. 

Magnitude: Low to medium Depending upon the size and location of the fire, and the damage it causes. 
Probability: Low It is unlikely that a wildfire will occur. 
Confidence: High Based on the professional experience of the assessment team. 
Significance: Not Significant  There are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of a permanent 

or long-term effect of high magnitude that cannot be mitigated. 
c. Depending on the type 

and severity of the 
change in weather 
trends, the scheduling 
of maintenance 
activities may be 
affected 

Impact balance: Negative Changes in weather might change the scheduling of maintenance activities.  
Spatial boundary: Aquatics LSA Changing weather trends in the Aquatics LSA could affect the maintenance schedule. 
Duration: Immediate to 
Short-Term 

The event affecting the maintenance schedule (i.e., increased intensity and duration 
of peak flows, wildfires) may last more than 2 days depending on the severity. 

Frequency: Accidental Events causing the change in maintenance schedule (i.e., increased intensity and 
duration of peak flows, wildfires) are rare in the Project area. 

Reversibility: Short-Term It is likely that maintenance activities affected by changes in weather trends could be 
rescheduled within a year. 

Magnitude: Low  Most maintenance activities are routine and, consequently, can accommodate a 
change in schedule. 

Probability: Low NGTL’s adaptive management practices would accommodate local ground conditions 
in light of changing weather trends. 

Confidence: High Based on the professional experience of the assessment team. 
Significance: Not Significant  There are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of a permanent 

or long-term effect of high magnitude that cannot be mitigated. 

Note: Significant Residual Environmental Effect: A high probability of occurrence of a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot 
be technically or economically mitigated. 

 

Flooding 
An extreme flood event, either during construction or operations, could result in a loss of cover over the 
pipelines along floodplains and in watercourses crossed by the pipelines. The potential effects of flooding 
and associated mitigation measures vary depending upon the timing, location and magnitude of the event. 
 

   
Page 6-146 

 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
A flood event that occurs immediately prior to the commencement of instream construction at a water 
crossing could delay construction activities and, in extreme cases, threaten the integrity of the temporary 
vehicle crossing. The duration of use will be considered during the selection of the type of temporary vehicle 
crossing to be installed while the design, sizing and freeboard (e.g., single span structure) of the vehicle 
crossing will meet or exceed the requirements identified in the applicable provincial and federal regulations. 
These structures will be designed and installed to handle the anticipated flow conditions during the period 
of use. 

Should flooding occur during construction of a trenched watercourse crossing, the increased flows could 
exceed the capability of the dams, pumps or flumes used to isolate the construction area or erode onshore 
spoil piles. In the unlikely event that flooding occurs during instream construction, water quality would likely 
be somewhat reduced due to an incremental increase in TSS over the slightly elevated TSS levels that are 
commonly associated with instream construction. The Flood and Excessive Flow Contingency Plan outlined 
in Appendix 1 would be implemented to reduce the effects of high water levels during instream construction. 
The risk of a flood occurring during instream construction is considered to be low since construction of the 
pipeline is scheduled to commence when instream flow is expected to be low. In addition, the weather 
forecast applicable to the watersheds for the anticipated crossing construction period can be reviewed 
immediately prior to commencement of crossing construction enabling the timely implementation of 
measures to mitigate any concerns. 

Watercourse crossing construction is proposed during low flow periods or after peak flows and the pipelines 
will be buried deep enough to reduce the potential effects of flooding as well as associated erosion and 
scouring. Nevertheless, line patrols during operations will pay particular attention to the bed and banks of 
watercourse crossings following floods to further ensure the integrity of the pipelines and minimize effects 
on the aquatic environment. Remedial measures will be taken immediately, where warranted, following 
receipt of applicable approvals. Consequently, the probability of a flood resulting in a significant adverse 
environmental effect is low. This residual effect is considered to be reversible in the short-term and is 
approaching however, within environmental or social tolerance and, consequently, is of medium magnitude 
(Table 6.5.2, point [a]).  

Wildfire 
The construction of the pipeline components is scheduled during fall and winter. Prior to initiating 
construction activities or maintenance activities during operations, it is recommended that NGTL contact 
AESRD to discuss the timing of any prescribed burns in the area of the activity and will work with them to 
resolve any potential conflict. Consequently, the probability that prescribed burns may have an effect on 
the construction or operations of the Project is considered to be low and of low magnitude. 

A wildfire in the immediate vicinity of the Project during the construction phase, although unlikely, could 
delay construction activities along the affected portions of the pipeline route. Construction activities and 
construction-related traffic would be suspended in potentially affected portions if conditions were 
considered to be unsafe by the NGTL Construction Manager or if requested by AESRD. The short delay of 
construction activities due to wildfire generally would be considered as having a minor effect on the Project 
with the exception of a severe wildfire, which could affect large portions of the route and could delay the 
resumption of construction activities into another season. During the operations phase, forest fires are 
unlikely to adversely affect the buried pipeline; however, they could affect above ground facilities (e.g., valve 
sites). 

Contingency measures identified in the Fire Suppression Contingency Plan (Appendix 1) have been 
prepared to ensure that appropriate and effective procedures and materials are in place in the event of a 
fire accidentally caused during construction of the Project. As described in Section 6.2.20, the probability 
of a fire resulting in a significant adverse environmental effect is low (Table 6.5.2, point [b]). 

Changing Weather Trends 
Changes to weather trends during operations of the Project may manifest in several ways. Increases in 
snow pack in winter and warmer temperatures during spring may extend and intensify runoff, and alter 
hydrologic regimes in watercourses including timing and duration of peak flows. Changes in summer 
temperatures and rainfall patterns could lead to an increase in wildfires. During operations of the Project, it 
 

   
Page 6-147 

 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
is expected that NGTL will be adaptive in their management of the Project and schedule maintenance 
activities to accommodate local environmental conditions using the mitigation measures outlined in the EPP 
where applicable (e.g., conducting activity in riparian areas during periods of low flow and least risk). NGTL 
will implement the appropriate protection measures to suit local environmental conditions (e.g., regulatory 
measures regarding disposal of MPB-infested vegetation) so as to reduce the severity of the potential 
environmental effect. By utilizing adaptive management practices that are responsive to changing 
conditions, this residual effect is considered to be reversible in the short-term and of low magnitude 
(Table 6.5.2, point [c]). 

Combined Effects of the Changes to the Project Caused by the Environment 
An evaluation of the combined effects considers those residual effects that are likely to occur. Since the 
probability of environmental conditions affecting the construction or operations of the Project is low, an 
evaluation of combined effects of the changes to the Project caused by the environment is not warranted. 

6.5.1.5 Summary 

As identified in Table 6.5.2, there are no situations arising from the changes to the Project caused by the 
environment where there is a high probability of occurrence of a permanent or long-term residual 
environmental effect of high magnitude that cannot be technically or economically mitigated. Consequently, 
the residual effects of the changes to the Project caused by the environment during construction and 
operations of the Project will be not significant. 

6.6 Summary of Environmental and Socio-Economic Effects Assessment 

6.6.1 Summary of the Assessment of Potential Effects of the Project on the 
Environment 

The environmental and socio-economic effects associated with the Project are similar to those routinely 
encountered during pipeline and facility construction in a forested setting. 

The potential environmental and socio-economic effects associated with the Project were identified through: 
consultation with federal and provincial government representatives, other stakeholders and the general 
public; consultation with Aboriginal communities; review of existing literature; field studies; and the 
professional judgement of the assessment team. These potential effects were related to environmental and 
socio-economic elements including: 

• physical elements such as physical and meteorological environment, soil and soil 
productivity, water quantity and quality, air emissions, GHG emissions and acoustic 
environment; 

• biological elements such as fish and fish habitat, wetlands, vegetation, wildlife and wildlife 
habitat, and species at risk; 

• socio-economic elements such as human occupancy and resource use, heritage 
resources, traditional land and resource use, social and cultural well-being, human health, 
infrastructure and services, navigation and navigation safety and employment and 
economy; and 

• accidents and malfunctions. 

Several mitigation measures will be employed to avoid or reduce the severity the effects of the Project 
including: development of detailed, practical and effective mitigation measures to address numerous site-
specific and general issues; inspection during construction to ensure that planned mitigation is implemented 
and effective; and conducting the maintenance and operations of the Project with a high standard of 
environmental excellence. 

 
   

Page 6-148 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Through the implementation of the mitigation and enhancement measures, the residual effects associated 
with the construction and operations of the Project on the environmental and socio-economic elements 
were considered, in each case, to be not significant. 

6.6.2 Summary of the Assessment of Potential Effects of the Changes to the 
Project Caused by the Environment 

Environmental conditions such as flooding, wildfires and changes in weather trends were considered to 
have the potential to adversely affect the Project either during construction or operations or both. However, 
through the implementation of contingency plans, burial of the pipeline and design of the compressor 
station, the potential effects of the changes to the Project caused by the environment on the construction 
or operations of the Project are reduced and considered to be not significant. 

 

 
   

Page 6-149 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
7.0 CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ASSESSMENT 
Cumulative effects are changes to the environment that are caused by an action in combination with other 
past, present and future human actions (Hegmann et al. 1999). A cumulative effects assessment is an 
assessment of those effects. It is useful in assessing the interaction of a combination of impacts from one 
development with impacts from other developments occurring in the same ecosystem or region. A 
cumulative effects assessment expands the scope of traditional environmental assessment to evaluate how 
multiple activities may cause cumulative effects at both the local and regional scales (Finley and 
Revel 2002). In addition, a cumulative effects assessment differs from conventional project-specific 
environmental effects assessments by considering larger geographic study areas, longer timeframes and 
unrelated projects or activities (Antoniuk 2002). 

The scope of this cumulative effects assessment is appropriate for the scale of the Project. Hegmann et al. 
(1999) states that an assessment of a single project must determine if that particular project is incrementally 
responsible for adversely affecting a given element. Therefore, the total cumulative effect on a given 
element due to many actions must be identified, however, the cumulative effects assessment must also 
make clear to what degree the project under review is contributing to that total effect. 

A project-specific cumulative effects assessment need only focus on regional concerns where the principal 
project's activities may incrementally contribute to these concerns. Only those resources that will be directly 
affected by the project under review, as well as other projects or activities, need to be included in the project-
specific cumulative effects assessment. 

The cumulative effects assessment evaluates the residual environmental and socio-economic effects 
directly associated with the Project (as identified in Section 6.0) in combination with the likely residual 
effects arising from other projects and activities that have been or will be carried out in the element-specific 
LSA or RSA of the Project. Future projects considered in the assessment do not include proposed or 
hypothetical projects where formal plans have not been disclosed. 

7.1 Methodology 

The cumulative effects assessment of the Project contained the following steps: 

• identification of potential residual effects of the Project (Section 7.1.1); 

• determination of spatial and temporal boundaries for each environmental and 
socio-economic element where residual effects have been identified for the Project 
(Section 7.1.2); 

• identification of existing activities and reasonably foreseeable developments with residual 
effects that may act in combination with the residual effects of the Project (Section 7.1.3); 

• identification of potential cumulative effects (Section 7.1.4); 

• development of technically and economically feasible mitigation measures 
(Section 7.1.5); and 

• determination of the significance of the Project’s contribution to cumulative effects 
(Section 7.1.6). 

Each of these steps is described below in subsections below. This cumulative effects assessment 
methodology has been developed based on FEARO’s The Authority's Guide to the Canadian 
Environmental Assessment Act: Part II: The Practitioner’s Guide (FEARO 1994a), FEARO’s A Reference 
Guide for the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act: Addressing Cumulative Environmental Effects 
(FEARO 1994b), FEARO’s A Reference Guide for the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act: 
Determining Whether a Project is Likely to Cause Significant Environmental Effects (FEARO 1994c), CEA 
Agency’s Cumulative Effects Assessment Practitioners Guide (Hegmann et al. 1999), CEA Agency’s 
Assessing Cumulative Environmental Effects under the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act, 2012 
(CEA Agency 2013), the CEA Act, 2012 and the NEB Filing Manual (NEB 2014a). 
 

   
Page 7-1 

 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
7.1.1 Identification of Residual Effects of the Project 

Scoping of the potential residual effects to be included in the cumulative effects assessment helps focus 
the cumulative effects assessment on issues that are non-trivial. While Hegmann et al. (1999, 2002), Finley 
and Revel (2002) and Antoniuk (2000, 2002), among others, support the idea of narrowing the scope of 
issues to those of regional concern and select Valued Ecosystem Components (VECs), Duinker and Greig 
(2006) recommends that project scale environmental assessment analyses should proceed on the 
assumption that all effects are cumulative. The latter statement reflects the expectations of the NEB which 
are that each residual environmental or socio-economic effect is evaluated for potential cumulative effects 
(see Guide A.2.7 of the NEB Filing Manual). Nevertheless, Tables A-2 and A-3 of the NEB Filing Manual 
indicates that likely residual effects for physical and meteorological environment, GHG emissions or 
navigation and navigation safety elements need not be subject to a cumulative effects assessment. 
Consequently, all other likely residual environmental and socio-economic effects identified in Section 6.0 
are evaluated for potential cumulative effects, while those residual effects that are considered of regional 
concern are selected for more detailed analysis.  

As per Guides A.2.6 and A.2.7 of the NEB Filing Manual, if a physical, biological and socio-economic 
element evaluated in the environmental and socio-economic effects assessment (Section 6.0) had no 
residual effects predicted or effects were not considered likely, these were excluded from the cumulative 
effects assessment. Therefore, the cumulative effects assessment is limited to elements with residual 
effects that could act cumulatively with residual effects from other projects or activities. 

7.1.2 Spatial and Temporal Boundaries 

7.1.2.1 Spatial Boundaries 

Defining appropriate spatial boundaries for potential cumulative effects is a critical step in the cumulative 
effects assessment. The selection of an excessively wide or large spatial boundary can cause any 
Project-related cumulative effects to appear negligible compared to other actions (Hegmann et al. 1999) 
and increases the likelihood that an impact will be judged to be of no concern because it is relatively small 
in comparison (Antoniuk 2000, 2002, Magdych et al. 2002).  

Conversely, important regional and long-term effects may be overlooked or not considered if too small of a 
spatial boundary is used (Hegmann et al. 1999). An excessively small boundary may cause Project-related 
cumulative effects to appear very significant compared to other activities within the study boundary and 
potentially important issues outside the established boundary may be overlooked (Finley and Revel 2002). 
Antoniuk (2000, 2002) and Magdych et al. (2002) note that the selection of a small study area prevents 
consideration of incremental and cumulative effects that are best evaluated over large areas. If boundaries 
are small, a more detailed examination may be feasible, however, an understanding of the broad context 
may be sacrificed.  

Spatial boundaries or ZOI for potential Project-related effects are variable and may be based on a 
consideration of the local and regional environmental setting and any common connections or links that the 
project possesses with other activities or projects. As a result, different boundaries may be appropriate for 
different cumulative environmental effects (FEARO 1994b, Finley and Revel 2002). The spatial boundaries 
used in the Project cumulative effects assessment were determined to be the areas where potential 
cumulative effects are non-trivial and have been identified. The spatial boundaries for each element as well 
as the rationale for the boundaries are presented in the respective subsection for each element in 
Section 6.0. 

7.1.2.2 Temporal Boundaries 

Proponents and assessment practitioners are commonly asked to use pre-settlement or pristine conditions 
as the baseline for comparative purposes (Antoniuk 2000, Magdych et al. 2002). That approach is most 
appropriate for regional or planning studies where evaluation of historical and future trends is used to 
identify appropriate land and resource management measures. Current accepted practice is to use current 
conditions as the baseline for pipeline cumulative effects assessment (Antoniuk 2000, Magdych et al. 2002). 
A general discussion of the historical developments and activities that have created the baseline is included 
as background information (Section 7.1.3.1).   
 

   
Page 7-2 

 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
The temporal boundaries used in the cumulative effects assessment include past development (up to the 
construction of the Project), the construction phase of the proposed development commencing in May 2015 
and the operations phase commencing following completion of construction and extending to the expected 
life of the Project (i.e., 40+ years). Temporal boundaries identified for each element are presented in 
Section 7.2. 

7.1.3 Existing Activities and Reasonably Foreseeable Developments 

Existing activities or reasonably foreseeable developments that are likely to occur in the Project area will 
vary depending on the spatial residual effects boundaries identified for the specific environmental or 
socio-economic element.  

The criteria used to determine projects that may act cumulatively with the Project are: 

• the project or activity has already been built or conducted in the vicinity of the Project; or 

• the project is either proposed (public disclosure) or has been approved to be built, but is 
not yet built in the vicinity of the Project (i.e., reasonably foreseeable). 

7.1.3.1 Existing Activities and Events 

The early history of northeastern Alberta is closely tied to the fur trade. Present-day Fort McMurray 
originated as a fur trading post established by the Hudson’s Bay Company in 1870 (Hunt 2009). Settlers 
began to arrive in the area in large numbers in the early 1900s as oil entrepreneurs and the promise of a 
railroad increased the attraction to the area (Hunt 2009). In 1964, Great Canadian Oil Sands (now Suncor 
Inc.) began construction of the first oil sands plant north of the city to make the raw product, bitumen, into 
something more usable (Fort McMurray Today 2000). The town consequently experienced a population 
boom growing from 1,200 people that year to 10,000 by the mid-1970s. A second project 10 years later 
(Syncrude Canada) spurred additional growth (The Canadian Encyclopedia 2012).  

In general, existing activities in the LSA and RSA for various elements may include the following: 

• timber harvesting; 

• utility activities (e.g., transmission lines, gas distribution lines); 

• transportation development (i.e., road infrastructure and railways); and 

• oil and gas exploration and development activities, including seismic operations, 
pipelines, access roads and lease sites. 

Timber Harvesting 
The Project is located within Alberta-Pacific Forest Industries Incorporated’s L3 area for timber harvesting 
(Alberta-Pacific Forest Industries Incorporated 2013). 

Utility Activities 
Current and ongoing utility activities in the RSAs for various elements include new construction and 
maintenance on powerline and gas distribution rights-of-way (e.g., AltaLink Management Ltd. [AltaLink]). 

Transportation Development 
Current and ongoing transportation activities in the RSAs for various elements include regular and 
commercial vehicle traffic, and maintenance or upgrade activities on roads, bridges, highways and railways. 

Oil and Gas 
Oil and gas activity in the RSAs for various elements has been ongoing since the 1950s. Oil and gas 
exploration and development activities which have been conducted over the years include the construction 

 
   

Page 7-3 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
and operation/maintenance of seismic operations, pipelines, facilities, access roads and lease sites 
(e.g., wells, gas plants, compressor stations).  

Recent projects include Harvest Operations Corporation (Harvest) Blackgold Oil Sands Project (Initial 
Project) (applied for by Korean National Oil Corporation). The lease is located approximately 10 km 
southeast of Conklin, Alberta and covers 15 sections within 76-7 W4M. This facility is designed to produce 
1,590 m3/d of bitumen (10,000 barrels per day [bpd]) from the McMurray formation using conventional 
steam-assisted gravity drainage (SAGD). As of 2012, 15 SAGD well pairs from two well pads had been 
drilled, and first production is expected in 2014. Phase 2 of the project will see production increase to 
20,000 bpd (Harvest Operations 2009, 2014).  

Construction commenced in early 2012 on Phase 3 of the Devon Canada Jackfish Oil Sands Project located 
at 24-75-7 W4M. This project will also use SAGD technology with planned initial drilling of four, seven-pair 
well pads (Devon Canada 2009). Construction is expected to be completed in late 2014. 

The Sunday Creek South Lateral Loop No.3 was recently completed by NGTL. The Project, located 
approximately 14 km southeast of the Hamlet of Conklin, Alberta, consists of two parts. The first part is 
approximately 12.8 km of 609.6 mm (NPS 24) pipe transporting natural gas from a valve site at 
6-9-76-5 W4M to the Sunday Creek South Sales Meter Station at 13-5-76-6 W4M. The second part consists 
of approximately 200 m of 323.9 mm (NPS 12) crossover piping located within 5-11-76-06 W4M 
(TERA 2013).  

The Cheecham/Kettle River Area Expansion Pipeline Project in the Regional Municipality of Wood Buffalo 
was constructed between January and April 2012. The project consists of a 26 km sweet natural gas 
pipeline extending from a tie in point on the existing Kettle River North Lateral at LSD 14-34-81-6 W4M to 
the Cheecham West No. 2 Sales Meter Station located in 16-9-84-6 W4M, and required 17 m to 23 m of 
new right-of-way (Golder Associates 2014). 

Cenovus FCCL Ltd. (Cenovus FCCL) is the operator for the FCCL Partnership projects in the Foster 
Creek/Christina Lake area. The Christina Lake Thermal Project was originally approved in 2000 and has 
been producing oil since 2002. The project has been developed in phases (A to G have been approved) 
over the past decade. Construction is currently underway on phases E and F and construction for Phase G 
is scheduled to commence in 2014 (Cenovus FCCL 2012a). In total, phases E, F and G will add an 
additional 396 ha of disturbance to the landscape, 41 ha of which is existing. All phases have been included 
as existing development in the analysis since disturbance due to Phase G alone was not reported. 

Approval for Cenovus FCCL’s Narrows Lake Project was granted in May 2012 and ground work is currently 
underway. This project is located approximately 10 km east of Conklin, to the north of Christina Lake. When 
complete, the Narrows Lake Project will consist of oil treating, steam production, water and sulphur 
treatment facilities as well as an estimated 21 well pads (Cenovus FCCL 2010). 

7.1.3.2 Proposed Project Activities 

The Project activities consist of the construction and operations of the Liege Lateral Loop No. 2 Pipeline 
and associated permanent facilities (i.e., the proposed Leismer East Compressor Station). A detailed 
description of the Project is provided in Section 2.0. 

7.1.3.3 Reasonably Foreseeable Developments 

Sources reviewed to identify projects and activities that could have cumulative interactions with the Project 
include: CEA Agency – Environmental Assessment Registry; Major Project Management Office (MPMO) 
Tracker; NEB – Major Applications and Projects; Canada’s Economic Action Plan – Project Map; AER 
Integrated Application Registry; AUC – Applications Search; Alberta Enterprise and Advanced Education – 
Inventory of Major Alberta Projects; Alberta Transportation; ATCO Electric; ATCO Power; AltaLink – Alberta 
Project Map; and the Lac La Biche County and RM of Wood Buffalo websites (CEA Agency 2014, 
Government of Canada 2014c, NEB 2014c, Government of Canada 2014d, AER 2014, AUC 2014, Alberta 
Enterprise and Advanced Education 2014, Alberta Transportation 2014b, ATCO 2013a,b, AltaLink 2014, 
Lac La Biche 2014 and RM of Wood Buffalo 2014). Other activities and reasonably foreseeable 
developments included in the assessment were identified as of May 28, 2014. 
 

   
Page 7-4 

 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Forestry Activities 
Based on Al-Pac’s general development plan, outlined in their 2013-2014 Annual Operating Plan Summary, 
no timber harvesting activities are planned near the Project through to the end of 2015.  

Utility Activities 
There are no known reasonably foreseeable utility development planned within the Project RSAs for various 
elements (AER 2014, AUC 2014, ATCO Ltd. 2013a,b, AltaLink 2014). 

Roads 
There is one known reasonably foreseeable road development planned within the Project RSAs for various 
elements, located at 8-22-88-9 W4M to 4-29-67-17 W4M.  

Oil and Gas Exploration and Development Activities 
Approximately 77% of the proposed pipeline route parallels existing linear dispositions. Within the RSAs for 
various elements, companies that have recently applied to the AER to construct and operate oil and gas 
developments are listed in Tables 7.1A, 7.1B and 7.1C and shown on Figures 7.1A, 7.1B and 7.1C.  

Pipelines 
There are 39 reasonably foreseeable pipeline developments by Athabasca Oil Sands Pipeline Ltd., 
Athabasca Oil Corporation, Connacher Oil and Gas Limited, Enbridge Pipeline (Athabasca) Inc, Enbridge 
Pipelines (Woodland) Inc., Grand Rapids Pipeline GP Ltd., Nexen Energy ULC and Perpetual Energy 
Operating Corp. within the RSAs for various elements (Table 7.1A). Although the development schedule of 
most of these pipeline projects is unknown, for the purposes of the cumulative effects assessment, it was 
assumed that these developments would be constructed during the same period as the proposed Project.  

Facilities 
There are 125 reasonably foreseeable facility developments (i.e., battery, satellite and gas gathering and 
processing plants) by Alberta Ministry of Transportation, AltaGas Ltd., Altex Energy Ltd., Athabasca Oil 
Corporation, Canadian Natural Resources Limited, Chinook Energy Inc., Connacher Oil and Gas Limited, 
Grand Rapids Pipeline GP Ltd., Grizzly Oil Sands ULC, Husky Oil Operations, Inter Pipeline Polaris Inc., 
Japan Canada Oil Sands Limited, Nexen Energy ULC, Perpetual Energy Operating Corp. and Statoil 
Canada Ltd. within the RSAs for various elements (Table 7.1B). Although the construction schedule of 
these facilities is unknown, for the purposes of the cumulative effects assessment, it was assumed that 
these developments would be constructed during the same period as the proposed Project.  

Wells 
There are 52 reasonably foreseeable well developments by AESRD (Water Management), Athabasca Oil 
Sands Corp., Cenovus FCCL Ltd., Connacher Oil and Gas Limited, ConocoPhillips Resources Corp., Japan 
Canada Oil Sands Limited, Nexen Energy ULC, Sebring Energy Inc., Statoil Canada Ltd., Suncor Energy 
Inc. and Value Creation Inc. within the RSAs for various elements (Table 7.1C). Although the drilling 
schedule of these wells is unknown, for the purposes of the cumulative effects assessment, it was assumed 
that these developments would be constructed during the same period as the proposed Project. 

  

 
   

Page 7-5 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and the Leismer East Compressor Station Project  September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
TABLE 7.1A 

 
REASONABLY FORESEEABLE PIPELINE DEVELOPMENTS WITHIN THE LIEGE LATERAL LOOP NO. 2 – THORNBURY SECTION AND LEISMER EAST COMPRESSOR STATION RSA AND LSA OF VARIOUS ELEMENTS 

Ma
pp

in
g 

No
.1  

Pr
im

ar
y A

pp
lic

an
t 

De
ve

lo
pm

en
t T

yp
e 

Le
ga

l L
oc

at
io

n 
(W

4M
)  

    
    

    
    

    
   

[F
ro

m
 X

X 
to

 X
X]

 

Ap
pl

ica
tio

n 
St

at
us

1  

Ph
ys

ica
l E

nv
iro

nm
en

t 

Ac
ou

st
ic 

En
vir

on
m

en
t 

Ai
r E

m
iss

io
ns

 

Ve
ge

ta
tio

n 

W
et

lan
ds

 

W
ild

lif
e  

Ca
rib

ou
 

W
at

er
 Q

ua
lit

y &
 

Qu
an

tit
y 

Fi
sh

 an
d 

Fi
sh

 H
ab

ita
t 

Hu
m

an
 O

cc
up

an
cy

 &
 

Re
so

ur
ce

 U
se

  / 
Hu

m
an

 &
 E

co
lo

gi
ca

l 

In
fra

st
ru

ct
ur

e &
 

Se
rv

ice
s /

 E
m

pl
oy

m
en

t 
& 

Ec
on

om
y 

Tr
ad

iti
on

al 
La

nd
 &

 
Re

so
ur

ce
 U

se
 

He
rit

ag
e R

es
ou

rc
es

 

LSA LSA LSA RSA LSA RSA LSA RSA LSA RSA RSA LSA RSA LSA RSA LSA RSA LSA RSA LSA RSA RSA 

1 ALBERTA OIL SANDS PIPELINE LTD. PIPELINE 16-07-079-14 TO 15-07-079-14 To Be Constructed                     ✓           ✓   ✓   ✓ ✓ 

2 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION PIPELINE 05-30-086-09 TO 14-31-086-09 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

3 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION PIPELINE 13-31-086-09 TO 14-31-086-09 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

4 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION PIPELINE 13-31-086-09 TO 05-30-086-09 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

5 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION PIPELINE 14-31-086-09 TO 05-30-086-09 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

6 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION PIPELINE 15-31-086-09 TO 15-31-086-09 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

7 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION PIPELINE 14-31-086-09 TO 13-31-086-09 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

8 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION PIPELINE 05-30-086-09 TO 06-30-086-09 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

9 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION PIPELINE 14-31-084-11 TO 05-30-086-09 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

10 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION PIPELINE 15-31-086-09 TO 15-31-086-09 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

11 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION PIPELINE 15-31-086-09 TO 15-31-086-09 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

12 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION PIPELINE 10-31-086-09 TO 10-31-086-09 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

13 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION PIPELINE 06-30-086-09 TO 06-30-086-09 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

14 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION PIPELINE 05-30-086-09 TO 06-30-086-09 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

15 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION PIPELINE 06-30-086-09 TO 06-30-086-09 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

16 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION PIPELINE 06-30-086-09 TO 06-30-086-09 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

17 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION PIPELINE 06-12-086-09 TO 14-19-086-09 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

18 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION PIPELINE 06-30-086-09 TO 05-30-086-09 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

19 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION PIPELINE 10-31-086-09 TO 10-31-086-09 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

20 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION PIPELINE 10-31-086-09 TO 10-31-086-09 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

21 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION PIPELINE 06-30-086-09 TO 06-30-086-09 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

22 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION PIPELINE 10-31-086-09 TO 10-31-086-09 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

23 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION PIPELINE 05-30-086-09 TO 13-31-086-09 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

24 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION PIPELINE 06-30-086-09 TO 05-30-086-09 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

25 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION PIPELINE 15-31-086-09 TO 15-31-086-09 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

26 CONNACHER OIL AND GAS LIMITED PIPELINE 14-16-082-12 TO 13-16-082-12 To Be Constructed                                     ✓       

27 CONNACHER OIL AND GAS LIMITED PIPELINE 13-16-082-12 TO 14-16-082-12 To Be Constructed                                     ✓       

28 CONNACHER OIL AND GAS LIMITED PIPELINE 13-16-082-12 TO 14-16-082-12 To Be Constructed                                     ✓       

29 CONNACHER OIL AND GAS LIMITED PIPELINE 14-16-082-12 TO 13-16-082-12 To Be Constructed                                     ✓       

30 ENBRIDGE PIPELINES (ATHABASCA) INC. PIPELINE 10-18-086-09 TO 06-08-084-06 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

31 ENBRIDGE PIPELINES (ATHABASCA) INC. PIPELINE 14-19-086-09 TO 15-18-086-09 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

32 ENBRIDGE PIPELINES (WOODLAND) INC. PIPELINE 15-22-080-07 TO 01-22-078-09 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

   
 Page 7-6  

 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and the Leismer East Compressor Station Project  September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 7.1A  Cont'd 

Ma
pp

in
g 

No
.1  

Pr
im

ar
y A

pp
lic

an
t 

De
ve

lo
pm

en
t T

yp
e 

Le
ga

l L
oc

at
io

n 
(W

4M
)  

    
    

    
    

    
   

[F
ro

m
 X

X 
to

 X
X]

 

Ap
pl

ica
tio

n 
St

at
us

1  

Ph
ys

ica
l E

nv
iro

nm
en

t 

Ac
ou

st
ic 

En
vir

on
m

en
t 

Ai
r E

m
iss

io
ns

 

Ve
ge

ta
tio

n 

W
et

lan
ds

 

W
ild

lif
e  

Ca
rib

ou
 

W
at

er
 Q

ua
lit

y &
 

Qu
an

tit
y 

Fi
sh

 an
d 

Fi
sh

 H
ab

ita
t 

Hu
m

an
 O

cc
up

an
cy

 &
 

Re
so

ur
ce

 U
se

  / 
Hu

m
an

 &
 E

co
lo

gi
ca

l 

In
fra

st
ru

ct
ur

e &
 

Se
rv

ice
s /

 E
m

pl
oy

m
en

t 
& 

Ec
on

om
y 

Tr
ad

iti
on

al 
La

nd
 &

 
Re

so
ur

ce
 U

se
 

He
rit

ag
e R

es
ou

rc
es

 

LSA LSA LSA RSA LSA RSA LSA RSA LSA RSA RSA LSA RSA LSA RSA LSA RSA LSA RSA LSA RSA RSA 

33 ENBRIDGE PIPELINES (WOODLAND) INC. PIPELINE 01-01-081-07 TO 15-22-080-07 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

34 GRAND RAPIDS PIPELINE GP LTD. PIPELINE 04-14-090-14 TO 02-16-053-23 To Be Constructed ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓   ✓ ✓ ✓   ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 

35 GRAND RAPIDS PIPELINE GP LTD. PIPELINE 04-05-084-06 TO 11-25-085-19 To Be Constructed ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓   ✓ ✓ ✓   ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 

36 GRAND RAPIDS PIPELINE GP LTD. PIPELINE 11-25-085-19 TO 04-05-084-06 To Be Constructed ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓   ✓ ✓ ✓   ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 

37 NEXEN ENERGY ULC PIPELINE 10-29-085-06 TO 10-29-085-06 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

38 NEXEN ENERGY ULC PIPELINE 04-32-085-06 TO 08-31-085-06 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

39 PERPETUAL ENERGY OPERATING CORP. PIPELINE 13-02-080-14 TO 09-03-080-14 To Be Constructed               ✓   ✓ ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓ ✓ 

 
  

   
 Page 7-7  

 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and the Leismer East Compressor Station Project  September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
TABLE 7.1B 

 
REASONABLY FORESEEABLE FACILITY DEVELOPMENTS WITHIN THE LIEGE LATERAL LOOP NO. 2 – THORNBURY SECTION AND LEISMER EAST COMPRESSOR STATION RSA AND LSA OF VARIOUS ELEMENTS 

Ma
pp

in
g 

No
.1  

Pr
im

ar
y A

pp
lic

an
t 

De
ve

lo
pm

en
t T

yp
e 

Le
ga

l L
oc

at
io

n 
(W

4M
)  

    
    

    
    

    
   

[F
ro

m
 X

X 
to

 X
X]

 

Ap
pl

ica
tio

n 
St

at
us

1  

Ph
ys

ica
l E

nv
iro

nm
en

t 

Ac
ou

st
ic 

En
vir

on
m

en
t 

Ai
r E

m
iss

io
ns

 

Ve
ge

ta
tio

n 

W
et

lan
ds

 

W
ild

lif
e  

Ca
rib

ou
 

W
at

er
 Q

ua
lit

y &
 Q

ua
nt

ity
 

Fi
sh

 an
d 

Fi
sh

 H
ab

ita
t 

Hu
m

an
 O

cc
up

an
cy

 &
 

Re
so

ur
ce

 U
se

  / 
Hu

m
an

 
& 

Ec
ol

og
ica

l H
ea

lth
 

In
fra

st
ru

ct
ur

e &
    

 
Se

rv
ice

s /
 E

m
pl

oy
m

en
t  

& 
Ec

on
om

y 

Tr
ad

iti
on

al 
La

nd
 &

 
Re

so
ur

ce
 U

se
 

He
rit

ag
e R

es
ou

rc
es

 

LSA LSA LSA RSA LSA RSA LSA RSA LSA RSA RSA LSA RSA LSA RSA LSA RSA LSA RSA LSA RSA RSA 

1 ALBERTA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORTATION FACILITY 07-36-081-13 To Be Constructed               ✓   ✓     ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓ ✓ 

2 ALBERTA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORTATION FACILITY 06-29-080-13 To Be Constructed     ✓ ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓ ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 

3 ALBERTA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORTATION FACILITY 04-31-077-14 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

4 ALTAGAS LTD. FACILITY 02-29-079-13 To Be Constructed               ✓   ✓ ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓ ✓ 

5 ALTEX ENERGY LTD. FACILITY 12-18-088-07 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

6 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION FACILITY 05-30-086-09 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

7 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION FACILITY 06-30-086-09 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

8 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION FACILITY 09-31-086-09 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

9 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION FACILITY 14-31-086-09 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

10 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION FACILITY 13-31-086-09 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

11 CANADIAN NATURAL RESOURCES LIMITED FACILITY 10-30-077-13 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

12 CANADIAN NATURAL RESOURCES LIMITED FACILITY 11-26-077-14 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

13 CANADIAN NATURAL RESOURCES LIMITED FACILITY 01-34-077-16 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

14 CANADIAN NATURAL RESOURCES LIMITED FACILITY 05-15-078-13 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

15 CANADIAN NATURAL RESOURCES LIMITED FACILITY 04-30-078-13 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

16 CANADIAN NATURAL RESOURCES LIMITED FACILITY 08-31-078-13 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

17 CANADIAN NATURAL RESOURCES LIMITED FACILITY 14-11-079-14 To Be Constructed                     ✓           ✓   ✓   ✓ ✓ 

18 CANADIAN NATURAL RESOURCES LIMITED FACILITY 16-01-080-14 To Be Constructed               ✓   ✓ ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓ ✓ 

19 CANADIAN NATURAL RESOURCES LIMITED FACILITY 02-19-082-16 To Be Constructed               ✓   ✓ ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓ ✓ 

20 CANADIAN NATURAL RESOURCES LIMITED FACILITY 07-29-082-15 To Be Constructed               ✓   ✓ ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓ ✓ 

21 CANADIAN NATURAL RESOURCES LIMITED FACILITY 08-36-082-15 To Be Constructed                     ✓           ✓   ✓   ✓ ✓ 

22 CANADIAN NATURAL RESOURCES LIMITED FACILITY 02-06-083-14 To Be Constructed                     ✓           ✓   ✓   ✓ ✓ 

23 CANADIAN NATURAL RESOURCES LIMITED FACILITY 09-12-083-15 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

24 CANADIAN NATURAL RESOURCES LIMITED FACILITY 05-36-083-16 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

25 CANADIAN NATURAL RESOURCES LIMITED FACILITY 16-08-084-16 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

26 CANADIAN NATURAL RESOURCES LIMITED FACILITY 04-26-084-15 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

27 CANADIAN NATURAL RESOURCES LIMITED FACILITY 15-14-085-17 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

28 CANADIAN NATURAL RESOURCES LIMITED FACILITY 14-14-085-17 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

29 CHINOOK ENERGY INC. FACILITY 10-19-077-14 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

30 CHINOOK ENERGY INC. FACILITY 12-35-078-15 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

31 CHINOOK ENERGY INC. FACILITY 06-06-079-14 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

32 CONNACHER OIL AND GAS LIMITED FACILITY 14-16-082-12 To Be Constructed                                     ✓       

   
 Page 7-8  

 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and the Leismer East Compressor Station Project  September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 7.1B  Cont'd 

Ma
pp

in
g 

No
.1  

Pr
im

ar
y A

pp
lic

an
t 

De
ve

lo
pm

en
t T

yp
e 

Le
ga

l L
oc

at
io

n 
(W

4M
)  

    
    

    
    

    
   

[F
ro

m
 X

X 
to

 X
X]

 

Ap
pl

ica
tio

n 
St

at
us

1  

Ph
ys

ica
l E

nv
iro

nm
en

t 

Ac
ou

st
ic 

En
vir

on
m

en
t 

Ai
r E

m
iss

io
ns

 

Ve
ge

ta
tio

n 

W
et

lan
ds

 

W
ild

lif
e  

Ca
rib

ou
 

W
at

er
 Q

ua
lit

y &
 Q

ua
nt

ity
 

Fi
sh

 an
d 

Fi
sh

 H
ab

ita
t 

Hu
m

an
 O

cc
up

an
cy

 &
 

Re
so

ur
ce

 U
se

  / 
Hu

m
an

 
& 

Ec
ol

og
ica

l H
ea

lth
 

In
fra

st
ru

ct
ur

e &
    

 
Se

rv
ice

s /
 E

m
pl

oy
m

en
t  

& 
Ec

on
om

y 

Tr
ad

iti
on

al 
La

nd
 &

 
Re

so
ur

ce
 U

se
 

He
rit

ag
e R

es
ou

rc
es

 

LSA LSA LSA RSA LSA RSA LSA RSA LSA RSA RSA LSA RSA LSA RSA LSA RSA LSA RSA LSA RSA RSA 

33 GRAND RAPIDS PIPELINE GP LTD. FACILITY 14-29-079-14 To Be Constructed               ✓   ✓ ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓ ✓ 

34 GRIZZLY OIL SANDS ULC FACILITY 13-11-085-12 To Be Constructed                                     ✓       

35 HUSKY OIL OPERATIONS LIMITED FACILITY 04-11-082-13 To Be Constructed               ✓   ✓     ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓ ✓ 

36 HUSKY OIL OPERATIONS LIMITED FACILITY 10-20-082-14 To Be Constructed                     ✓           ✓   ✓   ✓ ✓ 

37 HUSKY OIL OPERATIONS LIMITED FACILITY 01-29-083-14 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

38 HUSKY OIL OPERATIONS LIMITED FACILITY 10-07-084-13 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

39 HUSKY OIL OPERATIONS LIMITED FACILITY 10-14-084-14 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

40 INTER PIPELINE POLARIS INC. FACILITY 16-02-078-15 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

41 INTER PIPELINE POLARIS INC. FACILITY 16-02-078-15 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

42 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITED FACILITY 09-15-084-11 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

43 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITED FACILITY 09-14-084-11 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

44 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITED FACILITY 14-14-084-11 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

45 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITED FACILITY 14-15-084-11 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

46 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITED FACILITY 01-22-084-11 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

47 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITED FACILITY 09-22-084-11 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

48 NEXEN ENERGY ULC FACILITY 09-25-085-07 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

49 NEXEN ENERGY ULC FACILITY 09-29-085-06 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

50 NEXEN ENERGY ULC FACILITY 16-29-085-06 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

51 NEXEN ENERGY ULC FACILITY 16-30-085-06 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

52 NEXEN ENERGY ULC FACILITY 01-31-085-06 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

53 NEXEN ENERGY ULC FACILITY 07-31-085-06 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

54 NEXEN ENERGY ULC FACILITY 06-31-085-06 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

55 NEXEN ENERGY ULC FACILITY 10-36-085-07 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

56 NEXEN ENERGY ULC FACILITY 12-36-085-07 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

57 NEXEN ENERGY ULC FACILITY 12-31-085-06 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

58 NEXEN ENERGY ULC FACILITY 02-07-086-06 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

59 NEXEN ENERGY ULC FACILITY 05-08-086-06 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

60 PERPETUAL ENERGY OPERATING CORP. FACILITY 01-11-081-14 To Be Constructed       ✓       ✓   ✓     ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓ ✓ 

61 STATOIL CANADA LTD. FACILITY 16-21-078-10 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

62 STATOIL CANADA LTD. FACILITY 14-22-078-10 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

63 STATOIL CANADA LTD. FACILITY 08-28-078-10 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

64 STATOIL CANADA LTD. FACILITY 05-27-078-10 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

65 STATOIL CANADA LTD. FACILITY 13-03-079-10 To Be Constructed                     ✓               ✓       

   
 Page 7-9  

 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and the Leismer East Compressor Station Project  September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
TABLE 7.1C 

 
REASONABLY FORESEEABLE WELL DEVELOPMENTS WITHIN THE LIEGE LATERAL LOOP NO. 2 – THORNBURY SECTION AND LEISMER EAST COMPRESSOR STATION RSA AND LSA OF VARIOUS ELEMENTS 

Ma
pp

in
g 

No
.1  

Pr
im

ar
y A

pp
lic

an
t 

De
ve

lo
pm

en
t T

yp
e 

Le
ga

l L
oc

at
io

n 
(W

4M
)  

    
    

    
    

    
   

[F
ro

m
 X

X 
to

 X
X]

 

Ap
pl

ica
tio

n 
St

at
us

1  

Ph
ys

ica
l E

nv
iro

nm
en

t 

Ac
ou

st
ic 

En
vir

on
m

en
t 

Ai
r E

m
iss

io
ns

 

Ve
ge

ta
tio

n 

W
et

lan
ds

 

W
ild

lif
e  

Ca
rib

ou
 

W
at

er
 Q

ua
lit

y &
 

Qu
an

tit
y 

Fi
sh

 an
d 

Fi
sh

 H
ab

ita
t 

Hu
m

an
 O

cc
up

an
cy

 &
 

Re
so

ur
ce

 U
se

  / 
    

    
 

Hu
m

an
 &

 E
co

lo
gi

ca
l 

In
fra

st
ru

ct
ur

e &
 

Se
rv

ice
s /

 E
m

pl
oy

m
en

t  
    

    
    

    
    

 
& 

Ec
on

om
y 

Tr
ad

iti
on

al 
La

nd
 &

 
Re

so
ur

ce
 U

se
 

He
rit

ag
e R

es
ou

rc
es

 

LSA LSA LSA RSA LSA RSA LSA RSA LSA RSA RSA LSA RSA LSA RSA LSA RSA LSA RSA LSA RSA RSA 

1 ALBERTA ENVIRONMENT-WATER MANAGEMENT WELL SITE 07-36-077-15 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

2 ATHABASCA OIL SANDS CORP. WELL SITE 03-36-086-10 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

3 CENOVUS FCCL LTD. WELL SITE 11-33-078-07 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

4 CONNACHER OIL AND GAS LIMITED WELL SITE 05-08-082-12 LICENSED               ✓   ✓     ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓ ✓ 

5 CONNACHER OIL AND GAS LIMITED WELL SITE 02-17-082-12 LICENSED                                 ✓   ✓   ✓ ✓ 

6 CONOCOPHILLIPS CANADA RESOURCES CORP. WELL SITE 01-20-083-07 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

7 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITED WELL SITE 06-23-083-11 LICENSED                                     ✓       

8 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITED WELL SITE 06-23-083-11 LICENSED                                     ✓       

9 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITED WELL SITE 01-01-084-11 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

10 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITED WELL SITE 01-01-084-11 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

11 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITED WELL SITE 09-15-084-11 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

12 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITED WELL SITE 09-15-084-11 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

13 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITED WELL SITE 09-15-084-11 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

14 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITED WELL SITE 09-15-084-11 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

15 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITED WELL SITE 14-14-084-11 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

16 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITED WELL SITE 14-14-084-11 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

17 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITED WELL SITE 14-14-084-11 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

18 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITED WELL SITE 14-14-084-11 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

19 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITED WELL SITE 14-14-084-11 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

20 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITED WELL SITE 14-14-084-11 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

21 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITED WELL SITE 14-14-084-11 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

22 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITED WELL SITE 14-14-084-11 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

23 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITED WELL SITE 14-14-084-11 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

24 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITED WELL SITE 14-14-084-11 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

25 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITED WELL SITE 14-14-084-11 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

26 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITED WELL SITE 14-14-084-11 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

27 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITED WELL SITE 14-14-084-11 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

28 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITED WELL SITE 14-14-084-11 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

29 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITED WELL SITE 14-14-084-11 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

30 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITED WELL SITE 14-14-084-11 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

31 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITED WELL SITE 14-14-084-11 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

32 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITED WELL SITE 14-14-084-11 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

   
 Page 7-10  

 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and the Leismer East Compressor Station Project  September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 7.1C  Cont'd 

Ma
pp

in
g 

No
.1  

Pr
im

ar
y A

pp
lic

an
t 

De
ve

lo
pm

en
t T

yp
e 

Le
ga

l L
oc

at
io

n 
(W

4M
)  

    
    

    
    

    
   

[F
ro

m
 X

X 
to

 X
X]

 

Ap
pl

ica
tio

n 
St

at
us

1  

Ph
ys

ica
l E

nv
iro

nm
en

t 

Ac
ou

st
ic 

En
vir

on
m

en
t 

Ai
r E

m
iss

io
ns

 

Ve
ge

ta
tio

n 

W
et

lan
ds

 

W
ild

lif
e  

Ca
rib

ou
 

W
at

er
 Q

ua
lit

y &
 

Qu
an

tit
y 

Fi
sh

 an
d 

Fi
sh

 H
ab

ita
t 

Hu
m

an
 O

cc
up

an
cy

 &
 

Re
so

ur
ce

 U
se

  / 
    

    
 

Hu
m

an
 &

 E
co

lo
gi

ca
l 

In
fra

st
ru

ct
ur

e &
 

Se
rv

ice
s /

 E
m

pl
oy

m
en

t  
    

    
    

    
    

 
& 

Ec
on

om
y 

Tr
ad

iti
on

al 
La

nd
 &

 
Re

so
ur

ce
 U

se
 

He
rit

ag
e R

es
ou

rc
es

 

LSA LSA LSA RSA LSA RSA LSA RSA LSA RSA RSA LSA RSA LSA RSA LSA RSA LSA RSA LSA RSA RSA 

33 NEXEN ENERGY ULC WELL SITE 05-12-080-10 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

34 NEXEN ENERGY ULC WELL SITE 12-27-080-10 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

35 NEXEN ENERGY ULC WELL SITE 02-11-084-08 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

36 NEXEN ENERGY ULC WELL SITE 14-08-086-06 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

37 SEBRING ENERGY INC. WELL SITE 08-29-080-17 LICENSED               ✓   ✓     ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓   ✓   

38 STATOIL CANADA LTD. WELL SITE 14-22-078-10 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

39 STATOIL CANADA LTD. WELL SITE 14-28-078-10 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

40 STATOIL CANADA LTD. WELL SITE 16-33-078-10 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

41 STATOIL CANADA LTD. WELL SITE 15-08-083-09 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

42 SUNCOR ENERGY INC. WELL SITE 09-26-085-13 LICENSED                                     ✓       

43 VALUE CREATION INC. WELL SITE 02-31-087-08 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

44 VALUE CREATION INC. WELL SITE 11-31-087-08 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

45 VALUE CREATION INC. WELL SITE 09-36-087-09 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

46 VALUE CREATION INC. WELL SITE 02-06-088-08 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

47 VALUE CREATION INC. WELL SITE 04-06-088-08 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

48 VALUE CREATION INC. WELL SITE 01-04-088-09 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

49 VALUE CREATION INC. WELL SITE 03-04-088-09 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

50 VALUE CREATION INC. WELL SITE 12-05-088-08 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

51 VALUE CREATION INC. WELL SITE 15-01-088-08 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

52 VALUE CREATION INC. WELL SITE 14-04-088-09 LICENSED                     ✓               ✓       

 

   
 Page 7-11  

 
 
 



!.

!.

ST

ST

ST

14

37

18
10

06

03

25

08

07

11

24
21

13 15

20
16

1219

22

01

28

38

27

29
26

39

31
04

05

02

23

33

17

32

09

30

35 36

34

KP 0

KP 36.3

01

¯

t1
00

22
_R

ep
or

t_
EA

_F
ig

ur
e7

_1
A_

Re
as

on
ab

ly
Fo

re
se

ea
bl

eP
ip

el
in

eD
ev

el
op

m
en

ts
_R

ou
te

Re
v9

_R
ev

0.
m

xd

496955/492475

September 2014

Mapped By: DT Checked By: EH

Although there is no reason to believe that there are 
any errors associated with the data used to generate

this product or in the product itself, users of these data 
are advised that errors in the data may be present.

(All Locations Approximate)

0 10 20
km

SCALE:  1:500,000

UTM Zone 12N
Proposed Compressor Station, KPs,

Proposed Pipeline Routing: TransCanada 2014;
Highway: NRCan 2013; Railway: NRCan 2012;

Municipal Boundary: AltaLIS 2014;
Other Proposed Pipeline/Road Development: IHS Inc. 2014;

RSA:  TERA, a CH2M HILL Company 2014;
Hillshade: TERA Environmental Consultants 2008;

Grid: AltaLIS 2009.

Railway

Municipal Boundary

HighwayUV

Human Occupancy and
Resource Use

Wetlands

Heritage Resources

Wildlife

Caribou

Air Emissions

Aquatics

Traditional Land Use

Vegetation

Kilometre Post (KP)!.
Proposed Pipeline Loop

Other Proposed
Pipeline Development

Other Proposed
Road Development

Proposed Leismer East
Compressor Station")



t1
00

22
_R

ep
or

t_
EA

_F
ig

ur
e7

_1
A_

Re
as

on
ab

ly
Fo

re
se

ea
bl

eP
ip

el
in

eD
ev

el
op

m
en

ts
_L

ab
el

s_
Ro

ut
eR

ev
9_

Re
v0

.m
xd

26 CONNACHER OIL AND GAS LIMITED(14-16-082-12 W4M to 13-16-082-12 W4M)

29 CONNACHER OIL AND GAS LIMITED(14-16-082-12 W4M to 13-16-082-12 W4M)

28 CONNACHER OIL AND GAS LIMITED(13-16-082-12 W4M to 14-16-082-12 W4M)

27 CONNACHER OIL AND GAS LIMITED(13-16-082-12 W4M to 14-16-082-12 W4M)

30 ENBRIDGE PIPELINES (ATHABASCA) INC.(10-18-086-09 W4M to 06-08-084-06 W4M)

31 ENBRIDGE PIPELINES (ATHABASCA) INC.(14-19-086-09 W4M to 15-18-086-09 W4M)

32 ENBRIDGE PIPELINES (WOODLAND) INC.(15-22-080-07 W4M to 01-22-078-09 W4M)

33 ENBRIDGE PIPELINES (WOODLAND) INC.(01-01-081-07 W4M to 15-22-080-07 W4M)

34 GRAND RAPIDS PIPELINE GP LTD.(04-14-090-14 W4M to 02-16-053-23 W4M)

35 GRAND RAPIDS PIPELINE GP LTD.(04-05-084-06 W4M to 11-25-085-19 W4M)

36 GRAND RAPIDS PIPELINE GP LTD.(11-25-085-19 W4M to 04-05-084-06 W4M)

37 NEXEN ENERGY ULC(10-29-085-06 W4M to 10-29-085-06 W4M)

38 NEXEN ENERGY ULC(04-32-085-06 W4M to 08-31-085-06 W4M)

39 PERPETUAL ENERGY OPERATING CORP.(13-02-080-14 W4M to 09-03-080-14 W4M)

18 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION(06-30-086-09 W4M to 05-30-086-09 W4M)

17 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION(06-12-086-09 W4M to 14-19-086-09 W4M)

16 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION(06-30-086-09 W4M to 06-30-086-09 W4M)

15 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION(06-30-086-09 W4M to 06-30-086-09 W4M)

14 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION(05-30-086-09 W4M to 06-30-086-09 W4M)

13 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION(06-30-086-09 W4M to 06-30-086-09 W4M)

12 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION(10-31-086-09 W4M to 10-31-086-09 W4M)

19 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION(10-31-086-09 W4M to 10-31-086-09 W4M)

20 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION(10-31-086-09 W4M to 10-31-086-09 W4M)

21 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION(06-30-086-09 W4M to 06-30-086-09 W4M)

22 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION(10-31-086-09 W4M to 10-31-086-09 W4M)

23 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION(05-30-086-09 W4M to 13-31-086-09 W4M)

24 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION(06-30-086-09 W4M to 05-30-086-09 W4M)

25 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION(15-31-086-09 W4M to 15-31-086-09 W4M)

Other Proposed Road Development

Other Proposed Pipeline Development

08 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION(05-30-086-09 W4M to 06-30-086-09 W4M)

07 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION(14-31-086-09 W4M to 13-31-086-09 W4M)

06 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION(15-31-086-09 W4M to 15-31-086-09 W4M)

05 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION(14-31-086-09 W4M to 05-30-086-09 W4M)

04 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION(13-31-086-09 W4M to 05-30-086-09 W4M)

03 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION(13-31-086-09 W4M to 14-31-086-09 W4M)

02 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION(05-30-086-09 W4M to 14-31-086-09 W4M)

01 ALBERTA OIL SANDS PIPELINE LTD.(16-07-079-14 W4M to 15-07-079-14 W4M)

01 ALBERTA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORTATION(08-22-088-09 W4M to 04-29-067-17 W4M)

11 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION(15-31-086-09 W4M to 15-31-086-09 W4M)

10 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION(15-31-086-09 W4M to 15-31-086-09 W4M)

09 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATION(14-31-084-11 W4M to 05-30-086-09 W4M)



")

")

")

")

")

")")

")")")

")")
")

")

")

")

")

")

")

")
")
")

")

")

")

")

")")

")

")
")

")

")

")

")

")

")

")

")

")")

") ")")")
")
")

") ")")")
")")")")

") ")

")")

")

")")
")")

")

!.

!.

ST

ST

ST

KP 0

KP 36.3 01

02

03

04

05

06

07
08

0910

111213

14
15

16

17

18

19
20

21

22
23

24

25 26

27

28

29

30
31

32

33

34

35

36

37
38

39

40
41

42 43

44

45

4647

48
49

50

51

52

53 54

55
56

57
58 59

60

61

62
63

6465

¯

t1
00

22
_R

ep
or

t_
EA

_F
ig

ur
e7

_1
B_

Re
as

on
ab

ly
Fo

re
se

ea
bl

eF
ac

ili
ty

D
ev

el
op

m
en

ts
_R

ou
te

Re
v9

_R
ev

0.
m

xd

496955/492475

September 2014

Mapped By: DT Checked By: EH

Although there is no reason to believe that there are 
any errors associated with the data used to generate

this product or in the product itself, users of these data 
are advised that errors in the data may be present.

(All Locations Approximate)

0 10 20
km

SCALE:  1:500,000

UTM Zone 12N
Proposed Compressor Station, KPs,

Proposed Pipeline Routing: TransCanada 2014;
Highway: NRCan 2013; Railway: NRCan 2012;

Municipal Boundary: AltaLIS 2014;
Other Proposed Facility Development: IHS Inc. 2014;

RSA: TERA, a CH2M HILL Company 2014;
Hillshade: TERA Environmental Consultants 2008;

Grid: AltaLIS 2009.

Railway

Municipal Boundary

HighwayUV

Human Occupancy and
Resource Use

Wetlands

Heritage Resources

Wildlife

Caribou

Air Emissions

Aquatics

Traditional Land Use

Vegetation

Kilometre Post (KP)!.

Proposed Pipeline Loop

Proposed Leismer East
Compressor Station")

Other Proposed
Facility Development")



t1
00

22
_R

ep
or

t_
EA

_F
ig

ur
e7

_1
B_

Re
as

on
ab

ly
Fo

re
se

ea
bl

eF
ac

ili
ty

De
ve

lo
pm

en
ts

_L
ab

el
s_

Ro
ut

eR
ev

9_
Re

v0
.m

xd

Other Proposed Facility Development

49 NEXEN ENERGY ULCIn 09-29-085-06 W4M

50 NEXEN ENERGY ULCIn 16-29-085-06 W4M

51 NEXEN ENERGY ULCIn 16-30-085-06 W4M

65 STATOIL CANADA LTD.In 13-03-079-10 W4M

64 STATOIL CANADA LTD.In 05-27-078-10 W4M

63 STATOIL CANADA LTD.In 08-28-078-10 W4M

62 STATOIL CANADA LTD.In 14-22-078-10 W4M

61 STATOIL CANADA LTD.In 16-21-078-10 W4M

60 PERPETUAL ENERGY OPERATING CORP.In 01-11-081-14 W4M

59 NEXEN ENERGY ULCIn 05-08-086-06 W4M

58 NEXEN ENERGY ULCIn 02-07-086-06 W4M

57 NEXEN ENERGY ULCIn 12-31-085-06 W4M

56 NEXEN ENERGY ULCIn 12-36-085-07 W4M

55 NEXEN ENERGY ULCIn 10-36-085-07 W4M

54 NEXEN ENERGY ULCIn 06-31-085-06 W4M

53 NEXEN ENERGY ULCIn 07-31-085-06 W4M

52 NEXEN ENERGY ULCIn 01-31-085-06 W4M

34 GRIZZLY OIL SANDS ULCIn 13-11-085-12 W4M

35 HUSKY OIL OPERATIONS LIMITEDIn 04-11-082-13 W4M

36 HUSKY OIL OPERATIONS LIMITEDIn 10-20-082-14 W4M

37 HUSKY OIL OPERATIONS LIMITEDIn 01-29-083-14 W4M

38 HUSKY OIL OPERATIONS LIMITEDIn 10-07-084-13 W4M

39 HUSKY OIL OPERATIONS LIMITEDIn 10-14-084-14 W4M

40 INTER PIPELINE POLARIS INC.In 16-02-078-15 W4M

41 INTER PIPELINE POLARIS INC.In 16-02-078-15 W4M

42 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITEDIn 09-15-084-11 W4M

43 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITEDIn 09-14-084-11 W4M

44 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITEDIn 14-14-084-11 W4M

JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITED
In 14-15-084-11 W4M45

46 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITEDIn 01-22-084-11 W4M

47 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITEDIn 09-22-084-11 W4M

48 NEXEN ENERGY ULCIn 09-25-085-07 W4M

18 CANADIAN NATURAL RESOURCES LIMITEDIn 16-01-080-14 W4M

19 CANADIAN NATURAL RESOURCES LIMITEDIn 02-19-082-16 W4M

20 CANADIAN NATURAL RESOURCES LIMITEDIn 07-29-082-15 W4M

21 CANADIAN NATURAL RESOURCES LIMITEDIn 08-36-082-15 W4M

22 CANADIAN NATURAL RESOURCES LIMITEDIn 02-06-083-14 W4M

23 CANADIAN NATURAL RESOURCES LIMITEDIn 09-12-083-15 W4M

24 CANADIAN NATURAL RESOURCES LIMITEDIn 05-36-083-16 W4M

25 CANADIAN NATURAL RESOURCES LIMITEDIn 16-08-084-16 W4M

26 CANADIAN NATURAL RESOURCES LIMITEDIn 04-26-084-15 W4M

27 CANADIAN NATURAL RESOURCES LIMITEDIn 15-14-085-17 W4M

28 CANADIAN NATURAL RESOURCES LIMITEDIn 14-14-085-17 W4M

CHINOOK ENERGY INC.
In 10-19-077-14 W4M29

30 CHINOOK ENERGY INC.In 12-35-078-15 W4M

31 CHINOOK ENERGY INC.In 06-06-079-14 W4M

32 CONNACHER OIL AND GAS LIMITEDIn 14-16-082-12 W4M

33 GRAND RAPIDS PIPELINE GP LTD.In 14-29-079-14 W4M

01 ALBERTA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORTATIONIn 07-36-081-13 W4M

02 ALBERTA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORTATIONIn 06-29-080-13 W4M

03 ALBERTA MINISTRY OF TRANSPORTATIONIn 04-31-077-14 W4M

04 ALTAGAS LTD.In 02-29-079-13 W4M

05 ALTEX ENERGY LTD.In 12-18-088-07 W4M

06 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATIONIn 05-30-086-09 W4M

07 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATIONIn 06-30-086-09 W4M

08 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATIONIn 09-31-086-09 W4M

09 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATIONIn 14-31-086-09 W4M

10 ATHABASCA OIL CORPORATIONIn 13-31-086-09 W4M

11 CANADIAN NATURAL RESOURCES LIMITEDIn 10-30-077-13 W4M

12 CANADIAN NATURAL RESOURCES LIMITEDIn 11-26-077-14 W4M

13 CANADIAN NATURAL RESOURCES LIMITEDIn 01-34-077-16 W4M

14 CANADIAN NATURAL RESOURCES LIMITEDIn 05-15-078-13 W4M

15 CANADIAN NATURAL RESOURCES LIMITEDIn 04-30-078-13 W4M

16 CANADIAN NATURAL RESOURCES LIMITEDIn 08-31-078-13 W4M

17 CANADIAN NATURAL RESOURCES LIMITEDIn 14-11-079-14 W4M



")

")

")

")
")

")")")

")")

")")")")")")")")")")")")")")")")")")")")")")

")

")

")

")

")

")
")
")

")

")

")
")")
")")")")
") ")")

!.

!.

ST

ST

ST

KP 0

KP 36.3

01

02

03

04

05

0607 08

0910

11

12
13
14

15

16

17
18

19 20

21
22 23

24

25
26

27

28

29

30
31

32

3334

35

36

37

3839
40

41

42

43
44

45

4647

4849

50
5152

¯

t1
00

22
_R

ep
or

t_
EA

_F
ig

ur
e7

_1
C_

Re
as

on
ab

ly
Fo

re
se

ea
bl

eW
el

lD
ev

el
op

m
en

ts
_R

ou
te

Re
v9

_R
ev

0.
m

xd

496955/492475

September 2014

Mapped By: DT Checked By: EH

Although there is no reason to believe that there are 
any errors associated with the data used to generate

this product or in the product itself, users of these data 
are advised that errors in the data may be present.

(All Locations Approximate)

0 10 20
km

SCALE:  1:500,000

UTM Zone 12N
Proposed Compressor Station, KPs,

Proposed Pipeline Routing: TransCanada 2014;
Highway: NRCan 2013; Railway: NRCan 2012;

Municipal Boundary: AltaLIS 2014;
Other Proposed Well Development: IHS Inc. 2014;

RSA: TERA, a CH2M HILL Company 2014;
Hillshade: TERA Environmental Consultants 2008;

Grid: AltaLIS 2009.

Railway

Municipal Boundary

HighwayUV

Human Occupancy and
Resource Use

Wetlands

Heritage Resources

Wildlife

Caribou

Air Emissions

Aquatics

Traditional Land Use

Vegetation

Kilometre Post (KP)!.

Other Proposed
Well Development")

Proposed Pipeline Loop

Proposed Leismer East
Compressor Station")



t1
00

22
_R

ep
or

t_
EA

_F
ig

ur
e7

_1
C_

Re
as

on
ab

ly
Fo

re
se

ea
bl

eW
el

lD
ev

el
op

m
en

ts
_L

ab
el

s_
Ro

ut
eR

ev
9_

Re
v0

.m
xd

Other Proposed Well Development

01 ALBERTA ENVIRONMENT-WATER MANAGEMENTIn 07-36-077-15 W4M

02 ATHABASCA OIL SANDS CORP.In 03-36-086-10 W4M

03 CENOVUS FCCL LTD.In 11-33-078-07 W4M

04 CONNACHER OIL AND GAS LIMITEDIn 05-08-082-12 W4M

05 CONNACHER OIL AND GAS LIMITEDIn 02-17-082-12 W4M

06 CONOCOPHILLIPS CANADA RESOURCES CORP.In 01-20-083-07 W4M

07 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITEDIn 06-23-083-11 W4M

08 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITEDIn 06-23-083-11 W4M

09 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITEDIn 01-01-084-11 W4M

10 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITEDIn 01-01-084-11 W4M

11 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITEDIn 09-15-084-11 W4M

12 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITEDIn 09-15-084-11 W4M

13 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITEDIn 09-15-084-11 W4M

27 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITEDIn 14-14-084-11 W4M

28 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITEDIn 14-14-084-11 W4M

JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITED
In 14-14-084-11 W4M29

30 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITEDIn 14-14-084-11 W4M

31 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITEDIn 14-14-084-11 W4M

32 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITEDIn 14-14-084-11 W4M

33 NEXEN ENERGY ULCIn 05-12-080-10 W4M

34 NEXEN ENERGY ULCIn 12-27-080-10 W4M

35 NEXEN ENERGY ULCIn 02-11-084-08 W4M

36 NEXEN ENERGY ULCIn 14-08-086-06 W4M

37 SEBRING ENERGY INC.In 08-29-080-17 W4M

38 STATOIL CANADA LTD.In 14-22-078-10 W4M

39 STATOIL CANADA LTD.In 14-28-078-10 W4M

40 STATOIL CANADA LTD.In 16-33-078-10 W4M

41 STATOIL CANADA LTD.In 15-08-083-09 W4M

42 SUNCOR ENERGY INC.In 09-26-085-13 W4M

43 VALUE CREATION INC.In 02-31-087-08 W4M

44 VALUE CREATION INC.In 11-31-087-08 W4M

VALUE CREATION INC.
In 09-36-087-09 W4M45

46 VALUE CREATION INC.In 02-06-088-08 W4M

47 VALUE CREATION INC.In 04-06-088-08 W4M

48 VALUE CREATION INC.In 01-04-088-09 W4M

49 VALUE CREATION INC.In 03-04-088-09 W4M

50 VALUE CREATION INC.In 12-05-088-08 W4M

51 VALUE CREATION INC.In 15-01-088-08 W4M

52 VALUE CREATION INC.In 14-04-088-09 W4M

14 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITEDIn 09-15-084-11 W4M

15 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITEDIn 14-14-084-11 W4M

16 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITEDIn 14-14-084-11 W4M

17 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITEDIn 14-14-084-11 W4M

18 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITEDIn 14-14-084-11 W4M

19 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITEDIn 14-14-084-11 W4M

20 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITEDIn 14-14-084-11 W4M

21 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITEDIn 14-14-084-11 W4M

22 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITEDIn 14-14-084-11 W4M

23 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITEDIn 14-14-084-11 W4M

24 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITEDIn 14-14-084-11 W4M

25 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITEDIn 14-14-084-11 W4M

26 JAPAN CANADA OIL SANDS LIMITEDIn 14-14-084-11 W4M



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
7.1.4 Identification of Potential Cumulative Effects 

The identification of potential cumulative effects of the Project depends on many factors, including:  

• the source of the disturbance;  

• spatial and temporal boundaries;  

• resilience of the receiving environment; and  

• whether the disturbances combine in an additive or synergistic manner.  

The level of detail provided in the analysis reflects the extent to which a cumulative effect on an 
environmental or socio-economic element is probable, the likely scale or magnitude of effect, as well as the 
extent to which these effects can be accurately and reasonably quantified and described relative to the 
receiving environment. 

An integrated approach was used for the cumulative effects assessment for the Project since it combines 
elements of qualitative, fine-filter and coarse-filter (landscape) methods appropriate to the scope of the 
Project and associated issues (Antoniuk 2000, Magdych et al. 2002). Many residual effects were assessed 
qualitatively since the residual effect or element to be assessed did not lend itself to a quantitative 
assessment and given that the pipeline lies adjacent to existing pipeline rights-of-way for most of its length. 
A quantitative approach using GIS (e.g., areal disturbance analysis) was used to inform the assessment of 
wetlands, vegetation, wildlife and wildlife habitat, and species at risk. 

7.1.4.1 Quantitative Analysis Methodology 

For those residual effects or elements where a quantitative approach was used to assess potential 
cumulative effects of the Project, the following parameters were calculated: 

• the footprint of existing activities using aerial photography and the assumptions outlined 
in Table 7.2 to determine the existing condition in the element-specific LSA or RSA;  

• the Footprint of the Project using the PLA drawings provided by the Focus Corporation 
(2014); and 

• the footprint of reasonably foreseeable developments in the element-specific LSA or RSA 
as listed in Tables 7.1A, 7.1B and 7.1C using available project information or, in absence 
of detailed project information, the assumptions outlined in Table 7.2. 

For those residual effects or elements where a quantitative approach was used to assess potential 
cumulative effects of the Project, the following information was provided: 

• the area attributed to existing activities in the applicable LSA and RSA; 

• the area attributed to the Project;  

• the area attributed to existing activities plus the area attributed to the Project; 

• the area attributed to reasonably foreseeable developments in the applicable LSA and 
RSA;  

• the total cumulative effect (the area attributed to existing activities plus the area attributed 
to the Project plus the reasonably foreseeable developments in the applicable LSA and 
RSA); and  

• the percent contribution of the Project to the total cumulative effect. 

 
   

Page 7-18 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
TABLE 7.2 

 
LAND USE FEATURES AND ASSUMPTIONS USED FOR THE QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS 

Land Use Feature 
Footprint Assumption: Width 

(m) or Area (ha) 
Disturbance 

Hierarchy Data Source 

Cities/Towns Actual Boundary 1 
Alberta Biodiversity Monitoring Institute (ABMI) 2010a,b, 

AltaLIS 2011b, Natural Resources Canada 2003 
Airports/Airfields Actual Size 2 AltaLIS2011b, IHS Inc. 2009 

Primary Roads 50 m/lane 3 
ABMI 2010a,b, Alberta Ministry of Transportation 2014, 

IHS Inc. 2014a 

Quarries/Mines/Aggregates Average polygon size applied to point data or Actual size 4 
ABMI 2010a,b, AltaLIS 2011b, Alberta Ministry of 

Transportation 2014c  
Commercial/Industrial 

Features/Landfills 
Actual size or average polygon 

size applied to point data. 5 
ABMI 2010a,b, AltaLIS 2011b, IHS Inc.2011, 2014b, 

NGTL 2014a 
Secondary Roads 20 m 6 AltaLIS 2011c, IHS Inc. 2014a 

Railways 8 m 7 AltaLIS. 2011d, IHS Inc. 2013 

Well Sites 1.2 ha 8 IHS Inc. 2014c 
Tertiary Roads  8 m 9 AltaLIS 2011c, IHS Inc. 2014a, NGTL 2014b 

Buildings 
Actual size or 0.05 ha 10 ABMI 2010a,b, Government of Canada 2014c,d, Natural Resources Canada 2012 

Recreational Sites Average polygon size applied to point data or Actual Size 11 
AltaLIS 2011e 

Crop/Pasture Land Actual Size 12 ABMI 2010a,b 
Oil and Gas Pipelines 20 m 13 Cenovus Energy Inc. 2011, IHS Inc. 2014d, TransCanada 2014b, NGTL 2014c 
Temporary Workspace Actual Size 14 NGTL 2014d 

Transmission Lines 90 m 15 AltaLIS 2011f 
Cutlines 5 m 16 AMBI 2010a,b, AltaLIS 2011g 

Trails (recreation) 2 m 17 AltaLIS 2011e 
Cutblocks (0-30yrs) Actual Size 18 AMBI 2010a,b 

 

7.1.5 Mitigation Measures 

Best management practices implemented to mitigate Project-specific effects often limit the potential 
cumulative environmental effects (Finley and Revel 2002). The goal of mitigation is to attempt to avoid or 
reduce adverse effects to acceptable or non-significant levels. Mitigation measures are implemented to 
reduce the impact of any residual effects which may occur including the reduction of the magnitude of the 
effect, the limitation of the extent of the effect and the shortening of the reversibility of the effect (i.e., time 
to alleviate the residual effect). 

In order to ensure that potential cumulative environmental and socio-economic effects are reduced during 
Project construction and/or operations of the Project, additional mitigation measures beyond those listed in 
Section 6.0 are provided, where warranted. 

7.1.6 Determination of Significance 

The overall cumulative effects on an element and the Project’s contribution to these cumulative effects are 
described for each applicable element. The significance of the Project’s contribution to cumulative effects 
is determined in a manner similar to that employed in determining the significance of residual effects as 
previously outlined in Section 6.1.6 and summarized in Table 6.2 with the exception of spatial and temporal 
boundaries, which are discussed in Section 6.2. 

All significance assessment criteria (e.g., temporal context, magnitude, etc.) were considered by the 
assessment team for each cumulative environmental or socio-economic effect. 

 
   

Page 7-19 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
7.2 Cumulative Effects Assessment – Project Construction and Operations 

Those environmental and socio-economic elements in which adverse residual effects are predicted and are 
analyzed in the cumulative effects assessment are: 

• physical elements such as soils and soil productivity, water quality and quantity, air 
emissions and acoustic environment; 

• biological elements such as fish and fish habitat, wetlands, vegetation, wildlife and wildlife 
habitat, and species at risk; and 

• socio-economic elements such as human occupancy and resource use, traditional land 
and resource use, social and cultural well-being, human health, and infrastructure and 
services. 

The potential and likely residual effects associated with the construction and operations of the Project on 
each element are identified within each subsection of Section 7.2 along with the identification of existing 
activities or reasonably foreseeable developments acting in combination with the Project, as well as the 
cumulative effect and, if warranted, additional mitigation measures. 

An evaluation of the significance of the Project’s contribution to cumulative effects was conducted. Details 
of the significance evaluation are also discussed in each subsection of Section 7.2. 

7.2.1 Soil and Soil Productivity 

7.2.1.1 Potential Cumulative Effects 

Potential and likely residual environmental effects associated with construction and operations of the 
Project on soil and soil productivity are identified in Section 6.2.2 and listed in Table 7.3, along with the 
identification of existing activities and reasonably foreseeable developments acting in combination with the 
Project. 

TABLE 7.3 
 

POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF THE PROJECT ON SOIL AND SOIL 
PRODUCTIVITY CONSIDERED FOR THE CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ASSESSMENT 

Potential Residual Effect 
Spatial 

Boundary1 Component 
Temporal 
Boundary 

Potential 
Cumulative Effect 

Existing Activities/Reasonably Foreseeable 
Developments with Residual Effects Acting in 

Combination with the Project 
1. Mixing of strippings and 

subsoil due to strippings 
salvage activities or 
burial during trenching 
where strippings 
salvage did not occur 
may degrade soil quality 

LSA Pipeline and 
compressor 
station  

Past 
Development to 
Operations 

Increased 
disturbance to 
soils. 

• Existing activities/disturbance: timber 
harvesting, transmission development, 
transportation development, oil and gas 
exploration and development, and fire. 

• Reasonably foreseeable developments within 
the LSA listed in Tables 7.1A-C. 

• Project activities that could interact include 
strippings salvaging, grading, trenching, 
backfilling and reclamation. 

2. Topsoil/strippings and 
subsoil mixing during 
trenching with no 
stripping salvage 

LSA Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

Past 
Development to 
Operations 

3. Surface erosion may 
occur until a vegetative 
cover has been 
established 

LSA Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

Construction to 
Operations 

4. Excessive trench 
subsidence or a 
remnant crown may 
occur over the trench 

LSA Pipeline Construction to 
Operations 

5. Strippings and subsoil 
mixing during operation 
and maintenance 

LSA Pipeline Operations 

Note: 1  LSA = Soils LSA 

 
   

Page 7-20 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
7.2.1.2 Significance Evaluation of Potential Cumulative Effects 

A quantitative assessment was selected to evaluate the potential cumulative effect of the Project on soil 
and soil productivity since changes to this element can be quantified compared to existing conditions. 

Table 7.4 provides a summary of the significance evaluation of the Project’s contribution to potential 
cumulative effect on soil and soil productivity. The rationale used to evaluate the significance of each of the 
cumulative effect is provided below. 

TABLE 7.4 
 

SIGNIFICANCE EVALUATION OF THE PROJECT’S  
CONTRIBUTION TO CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ON SOIL AND SOIL PRODUCTIVITY 

Potential Incremental 
Cumulative Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 

a. Increased disturbance of 
soil 

Impact Balance: Negative Soil productivity could be lowered.  
Spatial Boundary: Soils LSA The Soils LSA is the appropriate spatial scale where potential cumulative 

effects are considered to be non-trivial given the localized nature of the 
potential residual effect on soil productivity. 

Duration: Short-Term The events acting in combination with the Project resulting in surface 
disturbance will occur during the construction phase or be completed within any 
1 year during the operations phase of the Project. 

Frequency: Periodic The existing activities/reasonably foreseeable developments that act in 
combination with the Project resulting in surface disturbance occur 
intermittently, but repeatedly, over the assessment period. 

Reversibility: Medium-Term The cumulative effect on soils is expected to return to approximate pre-
disturbance productivity in less than 10 years. 

Magnitude: Low Although total soil disturbance as a result of existing activities, the Project and 
reasonably foreseeable developments is predicted to increase in the Soils LSA, 
the estimated increase attributed to the Project is of limited areal extent and 
effect on end land use, and mitigation measures are to be implemented to 
reduce the effect on soil and soil productivity. 

Probability: High Disturbance to soils are likely to occur as a result of the Project acting in 
combination with existing activities and reasonably foreseeable developments. 

Confidence: High Based on a good understanding by the assessment team of cause-effect 
relationships between construction activities and soil productivity. 

Significance: Not Significant  There are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of a 
permanent or long-term cumulative effect of high magnitude that cannot be 
technically or economically mitigated. 

Note: Significant Residual Environmental Effect: A high probability of occurrence of a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot 
be technically or economically mitigated. 

 

Since surface disturbances can affect soil productivity and existing activities, the Project and reasonably 
foreseeable developments (as identified in Tables 7.1A-C) will act cumulatively to affect soils in the Soils 
LSA. The list of existing and reasonably foreseeable developments outlined in Tables 7.1A-C was reviewed 
to determine which projects and activities are likely to overlap spatially or temporally with the Project to 
have a cumulative interaction. 

Table 7.5 illustrates the current levels of disturbance attributed to various land use features and 
disturbances, as well as the anticipated disturbance attributed to the construction of the Project and 
reasonably foreseeable developments. Numbers are used in the table headings to clarify the values 
presented, where [1] is the area of existing disturbance in the Soils LSA, [2] is the incremental area of 
disturbance attributed to the Project, and [3] is the incremental area of disturbance attributed to reasonably 
foreseeable developments. Overall cumulative disturbance in the Soils LSA is presented for Project 
conditions [1+2] and for cumulative conditions [1+2+3]. 

  

 
   

Page 7-21 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
TABLE 7.5 

 
PREDICTED CHANGE IN AREA OF DISTURBANCE IN THE SOIL AND SOIL PRODUCTIVITY LSA 

Land Use 
Feature/Disturbance 

Feature 

Existing 
Conditions Project Conditions Reasonably Foreseeable Future Conditions 
Area (ha) of 
Disturbance 

(1) 

Change (ha) from 
Existing 

(2) 

Area (ha) of 
Disturbance 

(1+2) 

Change (ha) 
from Project 

(3) 

Change (ha) 
from Existing 

(2+3) 

Area (ha) of 
Disturbance 

(1+2+3) 
Cities/Towns/Communities 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 
Airports/Airfields 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 
Primary Roads 9.6 0.0 9.6 10.4 10.4 20.0 
Quarries/Mines/Aggregates 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 
Commercial/Industrial 
Facilities/Features or Oil 
and Gas Facilities 

31.6 8.4 40.0 -0.5 8.0 39.6 

Secondary Roads 0.2 0.0 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.2 
Railways 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 
Well Sites 6.4 0.0 6.4 0.0 0.0 6.4 
Tertiary/Access Roads 5.8 0.2 6.0 -0.2 0.03 5.8 
Buildings 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 
Recreational Sites 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 
Crop/Pasture Land 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 
Pipelines 98.2 95.2 193.4 39.9 135.1 233.3 
Temporary Workspace 0.00 24.0 24.0 -0.2 23.8 23.8 
Transmission/Power Lines 8.7 -0.1 8.5 0.0 -0.1 8.5 
Cutlines 34.7 -6.1 28.6 -0.5 -6.6 28.1 
Trails (Recreation) 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 
Cutblocks 89.6 -6.0 83.6 -2.4 -8.5 27.15 
Total Area  284.7 115.5 400.2 46.6 162.1 446.8 

Note: Numbers are used in the table headings to clarify the values presented, where (1) is the area of existing disturbance in the RSA, (2) is the 
incremental area of disturbance attributed to the Project, and (3) is the incremental area of disturbance attributed to foreseeable future 
developments. Cumulative disturbance is presented for Project Conditions (1+2) and Foreseeable Future Conditions (1+2+3). 

 

The results of the quantitative analysis are summarized in Table 7.6. Approximately 284.7 ha (7.6%) of the 
soils in the Soils LSA have been affected through surface disturbance associated with existing activities 
(Table 7.5). When combined with the Project and reasonably foreseeable developments, the total 
cumulative disturbance of soil in the Soils LSA is predicted to be 446.8 ha, which increases the percentage 
of disturbed soils in the Soils LSA to 12%. The Project contributes 3.1% (115.5 ha) to the total cumulative 
disturbance of soil. 

TABLE 7.6 
 

CUMULATIVE DISTURBANCE OF SOILS IN THE SOILS LSA  

Soils Disturbance Scenario Area of LSA Percent of Soils LSA 
Existing Disturbance to Soil   
Area of LSA 3,729.5 ha 100% 
Amount of Soil Disturbance in LSA Attributed to Existing Activities  284.7 ha 7.6% 
Estimated Future Disturbance to Soil   
Area of Soil Disturbance Attributed to the Project 115.5 ha 3.1% 
Area of Soil Disturbance in LSA Attributed to Reasonably Foreseeable Developments  46.6 ha 1.3% 
Predicted Cumulative Disturbance to Soil   
Total Cumulative Disturbance to Soil (Existing + Project + Likely Future) 446.8 ha 12% 

Note: Calculations based on footprint disturbances provided in Table 7.6 are approximate. 
 

 
   

Page 7-22 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
The proposed soils handling and other soils-related mitigation measures outlined in Section 6.2.2 will 
reduce cumulative effects on soil productivity. It is expected that operators of reasonably foreseeable 
developments will also implement similar measures developed in accordance with industry and provincial 
regulatory guidelines for soil conservation. No mitigation measures beyond the Project-specific mitigation 
already proposed in Section 6.2.2 are deemed to be warranted.  

The overall cumulative effect of existing activities, the Project and reasonably foreseeable developments 
on soil productivity within the Soils LSA is considered to be of low magnitude The Project’s contribution to 
cumulative effects on soil with the Soils LSA is considered to have a negative impact balance. Although 
total soil disturbance will increase, the estimated increase is of limited areal extent and the effect and 
mitigation measures will be implemented for soil conservation. The cumulative effect of the Project on soil 
and soil productivity is considered reversible in the medium-term since cumulative effects on soils are 
expected to return to approximate pre-disturbance productivity in less than 10 years (Table 7.4).  

7.2.1.3 Summary 

As identified in Table 7.4, there are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of a 
permanent or long-term cumulative effect of high magnitude that cannot be technically or economically 
mitigated. Consequently, the Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on soil and soil productivity within 
the Soils LSA will be not significant. 

7.2.2 Water Quality and Quantity 

7.2.2.1 Potential Cumulative Effects 

The potential and likely residual environmental effects associated with the construction and operations of 
the Project on water quality and quantity were identified in Section 6.2.3 and are listed in Table 7.7 along 
with the identification of existing activities and reasonably foreseeable developments acting in combination 
with the Project. No potential effects were identified for activities related to the construction and operations 
of the proposed Leismer East Compressor Station as the station will not be located within 30 m of any 
waterbody and, therefore, no cumulative effects analysis of the compressor station is warranted. 

TABLE 7.7 
 

POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF THE PROPOSED PIPELINE ON  
WATER QUALITY AND QUANTITY CONSIDERED FOR THE CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ASSESSMENT 

Potential Residual Effect 
Spatial 

Boundary1 

 
 

Component 
Temporal 
Boundary 

Potential 
Cumulative 

Effect 

Existing Activities/ 
Reasonably Foreseeable Developments with Residual 

Effects Acting in Combination with the Project 
1. Localized alteration of 

natural surface water 
flow patterns until 
trench settlement is 
complete 

RSA Pipeline Past 
Development 
to Operations 

Alteration of 
natural surface 
water flow 
patterns. 

• Existing activities/disturbance: timber harvesting, 
transmission development, transportation development, 
oil and gas exploration and development, and fire. 

• Reasonably foreseeable developments within the RSA 
listed in Tables 7.1A-C. 

• Pipeline-related activities that could interact include 
clearing, strippings salvaging, grading, trenching, 
backfilling and reclamation of approaches to watercourse 
crossings, vehicle crossing installation and removal, and 
bank reclamation. 

2. Reduction in surface 
water quality due to 
suspended solids 
during instream 
construction of trenched 
pipeline crossings or 
vehicle crossings 

RSA Pipeline Construction Reduction in 
surface water 
quality. 

• Existing activities: access roads, timber harvesting, 
transportation development and oil and gas exploration 
and development. 

• Reasonably foreseeable developments within the RSA 
listed in Tables 7.1A-C. 

• Pipeline-related activities that could interact include 
clearing, strippings salvaging, grading, trenching, 
backfilling and reclamation of approaches to watercourse 
crossings, vehicle crossing installation and removal, and 
bank reclamation. 

3. Reduction in surface 
water quality due to 
erosion from banks or 
approach slopes 

RSA Pipeline Construction 

Note: 1 RSA = Aquatics RSA 

 
   

Page 7-23 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
7.2.2.2 Significance Evaluation of Potential Cumulative Effects 

A qualitative assessment was considered the most appropriate method to evaluate the significance of 
potential cumulative effects on water quality and quantity, due to the lack of quantitative data and accepted 
standards, guidelines and ecological thresholds. This qualitative assessment relied on available literature 
research and the professional judgement of the assessment team.  

A summary of the significance evaluation of the contribution of pipeline construction and operations to 
potential cumulative effects on water quality and quantity is provided in Table 7.8. The rationale used to 
evaluate the significance of each of the cumulative effects is provided below. 

TABLE 7.8 
 

SIGNIFICANCE EVALUATION OF THE PROJECT’S CONTRIBUTION 
TO CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ON WATER QUALITY AND QUANTITY 

Potential Incremental 
Cumulative Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 

a. Alteration of natural 
surface water flow 
patterns 

Impact Balance: Negative The contribution of pipeline construction and operations to alteration of natural surface 
water flow patterns, in combination with existing activities and known foreseeable 
developments, will result in a negative impact. 

Spatial Boundary: Aquatics 
RSA 

The landscape scale is considered by the assessment team to be the appropriate 
spatial scale where potential cumulative effects are considered to be non-trivial. 

Duration: Short-Term The events acting in combination with the pipeline construction and operations 
resulting in an alteration of natural surface water flow patterns will occur during the 
construction phase or be completed within any one year during the operations phase 
of the pipeline. 

Frequency: Periodic The events causing the potential cumulative reduction in surface water quality 
(i.e., construction of the pipeline and other reasonably foreseeable developments) are 
confined to a specific period. 

Reversibility: Short to 
Medium-Term 

It may take more than one year in order for the cumulative effect on the alteration of 
natural surface water flow patterns to be reversed. 

Magnitude: Low The contribution of pipeline construction and operations to cumulative effects on the 
alteration of natural surface water flow patterns is considered to be low with, the 
implementation of mitigation measures during construction of the Project. 

Probability: High Pipeline construction and operations will likely act cumulatively with existing activities 
and reasonably foreseeable developments within the Aquatics RSA to alter natural 
surface water flow patterns. 

Confidence: High Based on data from the Project area and the experience of the assessment team. 
Significance: Not Significant  The pipeline construction and operations contribution to cumulative effects on natural 

surface water flow patterns is considered to be of low magnitude and reversible in the 
short to medium-term, and therefore, is not significant. 

b. Reduction in surface 
water quality 

Impact Balance: Negative The contribution of pipeline construction and operations, in combination with existing 
activities and known foreseeable developments, will result in a negative impact on 
surface water quality. 

Spatial Boundary: Aquatics 
RSA 

The landscape scale is considered by the assessment team to be the appropriate 
spatial scale where potential cumulative effects are considered to be non-trivial. 

Duration: Short-Term The period of the events acting in combination with pipeline construction and 
operations causing the potential cumulative reduction in surface water quality is 
limited to the construction of the pipeline. 

Frequency: Isolated The events causing the potential cumulative reduction in surface water quality 
(i.e., construction of the pipeline and other reasonably foreseeable developments) are 
confined to a specific period. 

Reversibility: Short to 
Medium-Term 

The contribution of pipeline construction and operations contribution to cumulative 
effects is expected to be reversed after the watercourse crossing is completed and 
once vegetation is re-established on the approach slopes and banks. 

Magnitude: Low to Medium Depending on the amount of sediment released acting cumulatively with sediment 
from adjacent roads and with sediment from reasonably foreseeable developments. 

Probability: High It is likely that existing activities, pipeline construction and operations and reasonably 
foreseeable developments will act cumulatively to reduce surface water quality during 
construction. 

Confidence: High Based on the experience of the assessment team. 
Significance: Not Significant  The pipeline construction and operations contribution to cumulative effects on surface 

water quality within the Aquatics RSA is expected to be low in magnitude and 
reversible in the short to medium-term and is therefore considered to be not 
significant. 

 
   

Page 7-24 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Note: Significant Residual Environmental Effect: A high probability of occurrence of a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot 

be technically or economically mitigated. 
 

Alteration of Natural Surface Water Flow Patterns 
Natural surface water flow patterns within the Aquatics RSA have been altered in the past due to existing 
activities such as timber harvesting, oil and gas development (e.g., pipelines, lease sites, access roads), 
and transportation activities (e.g., road infrastructure, railways). Natural surface flow patterns may also be 
altered as a result of construction of the pipeline, however, this is only expected to be likely until the trench 
has settled. There is the potential that reasonably foreseeable developments such as pipelines, facilities 
and wells would also have the potential to alter natural surface flow patterns.  

Reasonably foreseeable developments within the Aquatics RSA that may act cumulatively with the pipeline 
component of the Project include pipelines, facility developments and wells (Tables 7.1A-C). Without 
knowing project details of reasonably foreseeable developments, it is difficult to predict the Project’s 
contribution to the alteration of natural surface flow patterns in the Aquatics RSA. Of the reasonably 
foreseeable developments, those of a linear nature (i.e., pipelines) are assumed to have similar residual 
effects on natural surface water flow patterns as with the pipeline. 

With the successful implementation of the proposed industry-accepted standard mitigation measures, the 
Project’s contribution to altering natural surface flow patterns following pipeline construction is likely to be 
minor within the Aquatics RSA. It is expected that operators of reasonably foreseeable developments and 
ongoing pipeline maintenance programs in the Aquatics RSA will also implement measures developed in 
accordance with industry and provincial regulatory guidelines for surface water quality. No mitigation 
measures beyond the Project-specific mitigation already proposed in Section 6.2.3 are deemed to be 
warranted. 

The overall cumulative effect of the Project in combination with existing activities and reasonably 
foreseeable developments on natural surface water flow patterns within the Aquatics RSA is considered 
negative since it could decrease surface water quantity. However, it is considered to be of low magnitude 
given that industry standard and federal and provincial recommended guidelines and mitigation measures 
will be implemented during construction of the Project (Table 7.8, point a).  

The Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on alteration of natural surface flow patterns in the Aquatics 
RSA is expected to be reversible in the short to medium-term since the effect may take more than one year 
to be reversed.  

Reduction in Surface Water Quality 
In general, due to the remoteness of the Project from residential developments and absence of industrial 
effluent, there are few anthropogenic activities in the Aquatics RSA which have the potential to affect 
surface water quality. Existing activities such as transportation (e.g., travel and maintenance along roads) 
and oil and gas activities (e.g., recently installed pipelines) may reduce surface water quality in localized 
areas for a short period. During construction, the pipeline may also reduce surface water quality due to 
erosion from approach slopes and banks or increase in suspended solids during instream construction of 
trenched pipeline or vehicle crossings. Reasonably foreseeable developments may also reduce surface 
water quality in the event construction of the developments is concurrent with the construction of the 
proposed pipeline. 

Since wells and facilities are typically sited well away from waterbodies, the industrial facilities and wells 
identified in the Aquatics RSA (Tables 7.1B and 7.1C) are not likely to act cumulatively with the Project to 
reduce surface water quality. However, it is assumed that similar residual effects on surface water quality 
will be associated with the known proposed pipeline developments listed in Table 7.1A as with the Project. 

The sediment input from adjacent roads could act cumulatively with sediment released from pipeline 
watercourse crossings associated with the Project and other known reasonably foreseeable developments 
to reduce surface water quality. The implementation of mitigation measures described in Section 6.2.3 to 
reduce sedimentation as a result of construction of the pipeline will reduce the severity of cumulative 
residual effects. In addition, it is expected that the other reasonably foreseeable pipeline developments in 
 

   
Page 7-25 

 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
the Aquatics RSA will also implement measures developed in accordance with industry and provincial 
regulatory guidelines for surface water quality. No mitigation measures beyond the Project-specific 
mitigation already proposed in Section 6.2.3 are deemed warranted.  

The overall cumulative effects of the Project in combination with existing activities and reasonably 
foreseeable developments on surface water quality within the Aquatics RSA is considered to be of low to 
medium magnitude depending on the amount of sediment released acting cumulatively with sediment from 
adjacent roads from reasonably foreseeable developments. 

The Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on surface water quality within the Aquatics RSA is expected 
to be low in magnitude and reversible in the short to medium-term once the watercourse crossings are 
completed and vegetation is established on the approach slopes and banks (Table 7.8, point b). 

7.2.2.3 Summary 

As identified in Table 7.8, there are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of a 
permanent or long-term cumulative effect of high magnitude that cannot be technically or economically 
mitigated. Consequently, the Project contribution’s to cumulative effects on water quality and quantity within 
the Aquatics RSA will be not significant. 

7.2.3 Air Emissions 

7.2.3.1 Potential Cumulative Effects 

The potential and likely residual environmental effects associated with the construction and operations of 
the Project on air emissions is identified in Section 6.2.4 and is listed in Table 7.9 along with the identification 
of existing activities and reasonably foreseeable developments that may act in combination with the Project. 

TABLE 7.9 
 

POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF THE PROJECT ON AIR 
EMISSIONS CONSIDERED FOR THE CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ASSESSMENT 

Potential Residual 
Effects 

Spatial 
Boundary1 Component 

Temporal 
Boundary 

Potential 
Cumulative 

Effect 

Existing Activities/Reasonably Foreseeable Developments 
with Residual Effects Acting in Combination with the 

Project 
1.  Increase in air 

emissions during 
construction and 
site-specific 
maintenance 
activities 

RSA All Construction  Increase in air 
emissions, 
including 
fugitive dust 
and smoke 
during 
construction 
and operations. 

• Existing activities/disturbance: timber harvesting, 
transmission development, transportation development, 
oil and gas exploration and development, and fire. 

• Reasonably foreseeable developments within the RSA 
listed in Tables 7.1A-C as well as timber harvest 
activities. 

• All Project-related activities involving equipment could 
interact with the activities listed above. 

2.  Increase in air 
emissions during 
operations 

RSA Compressor 
Station and 
Pipeline 

Operations 

3.  Increase in 
fugitive dust and 
smoke during 
construction and 
operations  

RSA All Past 
Development 
to Operations 

Note: 1 RSA = Air Quality RSA. 
 

7.2.3.2 Significance Evaluation of Potential Cumulative Effects 

A quantitative assessment was selected to evaluate the potential cumulative effects of the Project on air 
emissions since changes to this element can be quantified compared to existing conditions. 

Table 7.10 provides a summary of the significance evaluation of the Project’s contribution to potential 
cumulative effects on air emissions. The rationale used to evaluate the significance of each of the 
cumulative effects is provided below. 

 
   

Page 7-26 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
TABLE 7.10 

 
SIGNIFICANCE EVALUATION OF THE PROJECT’S 

CONTRIBUTION TO CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ON AIR EMISSIONS 

Potential Incremental 
Cumulative Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 

a. Increase in air emissions Impact Balance: Negative Decreased air quality. 
Spatial Boundary: Air Emissions 
RSA 

Air emissions, fugitive dust and smoke resulting from the Project acting in 
combination with existing activities and reasonably foreseeable activities would 
dissipate within the Air Emissions RSA. 

Duration: Short-Term 
(during construction) to Long-Term 
(during operations) 

The events contributing to cumulative increases in air emissions occur during 
the construction phase or will be completed within any 1 year during the 
operations phase of the Project. The event causing increases in CAC 
emissions is the operation of the compressor station which has an expected 
operating life of approximately 40 years. 

Frequency: Isolated 
(during construction) to Continuous 

The events causing cumulative increases in air emissions, fugitive dust and 
smoke occur intermittently, but repeatedly, over the assessment period (during 
operations). The event causing increases in CAC emissions (i.e., operations of 
the compressor station) will occur continuously over the assessment period. 

Reversibility: Short to Long-Term Fugitive dust and smoke associated with construction and operations (i.e., site-
specific maintenance activities) are expected to dissipate within two days or 
within 1 year. Potential combined effects on air quality will be reversible 
following the decommissioning or abandonment of the Project, due to the 
inclusion of the compressor station component. 

Magnitude: Low (during operations) 
to Medium (during construction) 

An increase in CAC emissions will occur during construction however, 
emissions will be within regulatory limits during this time. Brief episodes of 
medium magnitude concentrations of CAC emissions may occur during 
construction activities. Project related emissions during site-specific 
maintenance activities will be detectable however, within normal variability of 
baseline conditions. An increase in CAC emissions during operations of the 
compressor station will be detectable, but are well within applicable 
environmental and regulatory standards and will occur at substantial distances 
from any potential receptors. 

Probability: High The equipment and vehicles associated with construction and site-specific 
maintenance activities (e.g., aerial overflights, integrity digs) will emit CAC 
emissions. The operation of the compressor station will emit CAC emissions. 

Confidence: Moderate Emissions data were based on the RWDI Air Quality and GHG Assessment 
(Appendix 4), however, the assessment of residual air quality effects is based 
on the experience of the assessment team. 

Significance: Not Significant  The increase in air emissions as a result of the compressor station operations is 
of low magnitude and is reversible in the long-term and, therefore, not 
significant. 

Note: Significant Residual Environmental Effect: A high probability of occurrence of a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot 
be technically or economically mitigated. 

 

Existing sources of increased air emissions in the Air Emissions RSA include oil and gas development 
(including ongoing pipeline and facility maintenance activities), utility activities (e.g., maintenance on 
transmission lines), transportation activities and forestry activities involving equipment use (i.e., timber 
harvesting). The construction of the pipeline and compressor station, and, to a lesser extent, the 
maintenance of the pipeline will increase air emissions. The operations of the proposed compressor station 
will increase air emissions. The operation of reasonably foreseeable developments will also increase air 
emissions. 

Reasonably foreseeable proposed air emission sources in the Air Emissions RSA include the construction 
of pipelines, facilities and wells. Although the construction schedule of the reasonably foreseeable 
developments is unknown, for the purposes of this cumulative effects assessment for increased air 
emissions, it was assumed that these developments plus the highway road construction would be 
conducted during the same construction period as the Project (Tables 7.1A, 7.1B and 7.1C).  

The Project will act cumulatively with existing activities and reasonably foreseeable developments in the 
Air Emissions RSA to increase air emissions during construction and operations. Without knowing how long 
each construction period is for each reasonably foreseeable development, it is difficult to predict the 
 

   
Page 7-27 

 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Project’s contribution to increased air emissions. Given the short duration of construction activities for the 
Project, it was assumed that the Project would contribute less to increased air emissions compared to the 
total emissions from the reasonably foreseeable developments. During operations, the results of the air 
dispersion modelling indicated that the maximum predicted NO2 and PM2.5 cumulative concentrations, 
including effects of the Project, external facilities, and ambient background levels, were less than their 
corresponding ambient air quality objectives for all averaging periods. Dispersion modelling results are 
outlined in Appendix 4.  

The mitigation measures in Section 6.2.4 will reduce the severity of Project-related cumulative air 
emissions. It is expected that operators of reasonably foreseeable developments will also implement 
mitigation measures developed in accordance with industry standards for air emissions. No mitigation 
measures beyond the Project-specific mitigation already proposed in Section 6.2.4 are deemed to be 
warranted. 

The overall cumulative effects increased air emissions in the Air Emissions RSA are considered to be of 
medium magnitude since the emissions arising from existing activities, the Project or reasonably 
foreseeable developments either are expected to low.  During operations of the proposed compressor 
station, air emissions will be detectable, but are well within applicable environmental and regulatory 
standards and will occur at substantial distances from any potential receptors. 

The Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on air emissions within the Air Quality RSA during 
construction, maintenance activities and operations through the release of air emissions is considered to 
be of medium magnitude since the emissions arising from the Project are expected to be within applicable 
regulatory requirements. The reversibility is considered short to long-term since the effects are expected to 
reverse upon completion of construction, maintenance or operations activities (i.e., the lifetime of the 
Project) (Table 7.10, point [a]).  

7.2.3.3 Summary 

As identified in Table 7.10, there are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of a 
permanent or long-term cumulative effect of high magnitude that cannot be technically or economically 
mitigated. Consequently, the Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on air emissions within the Air 
Emissions RSA will be not significant. 

7.2.4 Acoustic Environment 

7.2.4.1 Potential Cumulative Effects 

The potential and likely environmental residual effects associated with the construction and operations of 
the Project on the acoustic environment is identified in Section 6.2.6 and is listed in Table 7.11 along with 
the identification of existing activities and known reasonably foreseeable developments that may act in 
combination with the Project. 

TABLE 7.11 
 

POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF THE PROJECT ON THE  
ACOUSTIC ENVIRONMENT CONSIDERED FOR THE CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ASSESSMENT 

Potential Residual Effects 
Spatial 

Boundary1 

Component 
Temporal 
Boundary 

Potential 
Cumulative 

Effect 

Existing Activities/Reasonably Foreseeable 
Development with Residual Effects Acting in 

Combination with the Project 
1. Increase in nuisance 

noise during construction 
LSA Pipeline and 

compressor 
station 

Construction Increase in 
nuisance noise. 

• Existing activities/disturbance: timber harvesting, 
transmission development, transportation 
development, oil and gas exploration and 
development, and fire. 

• Reasonably foreseeable developments within the LSA 
listed in Tables 7.1A-C.  

• All Project-related activities involving equipment could 
interact with the activities listed above. 

2. Increase in nuisance 
noise during operations 
and maintenance 

LSA Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

Operations 

Note: 1 LSA = Acoustic Environment LSA. 

 
   

Page 7-28 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
7.2.4.2 Significance Evaluation of Potential Cumulative Effects 

A quantitative assessment was selected to evaluate the potential cumulative effects of the Project on the 
acoustic environment since changes to this element can be quantified compared to existing conditions. 

Table 7.12 provides a summary of the significance evaluation of the Project’s contribution to potential 
cumulative effects on the acoustic environment. The rationale used to evaluate the significance of each of 
the cumulative effects is provided below. 

TABLE 7.12 
 

SIGNIFICANCE EVALUATION OF THE PROJECT’S  
CONTRIBUTION TO CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ON THE ACCOUSTIC ENVIRONMENT 

Potential Incremental 
Cumulative Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 

a. Increase in nuisance noise Impact Balance: Negative Noise arising from construction activities will occur along the pipeline route and 
at the proposed compressor station location. 

Spatial Boundary: Acoustic 
Environment LSA 

Noise resulting from construction activities may transmit beyond the 
construction right-of-way and facility site. 

Duration: Short to Long-term The event causing nuisance noise is construction of the Project (short-term) 
and certain maintenance activities may take less than 2 days (e.g., aerial patrol) 
while the operation of the compressor station will take place for the life of the 
Project (i.e., 40 years). 

Frequency: Isolated to Continuous The event causing cumulative increases in nuisance noise is confined to a 
specific period (i.e., construction of the Project) and the operation of the 
compressor station (i.e., the operation of the compressor station).  

Reversibility: Short to Long-term Most effects associated with nuisance noise will be alleviated when 
construction is completed (short-term) while noise associated with the operation 
of the compressor station is expected to occur over the life of the Project 
(i.e., 40 years).  

Magnitude: Low Given the remote location and lack of permanent receptors and given that the 
Project is within the permissible sound levels outlined in Directive 038. 

Probability: High The proposed compressor station and certain equipment (e.g., heavy 
machinery) which may be used during site-specific maintenance activities will 
produce noise over baseline conditions while in use. 

Confidence: Moderate Emissions data were based on the RWDI Noise Impact Assessment 
(Appendix 5), however, the assessment of noise emissions is based on the 
experience of the assessment team. 

Significance: Not Significant  Increased noise during maintenance and operations is reversible in the 
immediate to long-term and of low magnitude and, therefore, considered not 
significant. 

Note: Significant Residual Environmental Effect: A high probability of occurrence of a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot 
be technically or economically mitigated. 

 

Ambient noise in the Project area is primarily caused by existing activities (i.e., local and industrial vehicle 
traffic, existing facilities and industrial maintenance activities). Although forestry activities may occur in the 
Acoustic LSA, no activities related to forestry are known during construction of the Project. Some other 
activities, such as overflights and maintenance/operations activities, that may contribute noise emissions, 
are of a very short-term nature and occur as isolated events.  

While the nuisance noise in the Acoustic Environment LSA will increase during construction of the Project 
and during maintenance activities, the increase is anticipated to be greater during construction than during 
maintenance activities given the use of heavy construction equipment and the longer duration of 
construction compared to maintenance activities. The NIA for the Project found that the increase in 
nuisance noise as a result of the proposed Leismer East Compressor Station,  will be in compliance with 
daytime and nighttime of 50 and 40 dBA PSLs mandated by Directive 038 at the LSA boundary. The 
potential for a low frequency noise scenario was identified, but the potential for complaints is considered 
low as no sensitive receptors are located nearby (Appendix 5). 

 
   

Page 7-29 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
The mandated ASL, predicted facility sound level contributions, and cumulative sound levels at the 
receptors are presented in Table 7 of Appendix 5. The results indicate the Project will comply with 
Directive 038 PSLs. All equipment was assumed to be running at 100% load, predicting worst-case summer 
time conditions. Consequently, the potential for cumulative effects of the Project on the acoustic 
environment is the greatest during construction and, as a result, the construction period is the focus of the 
cumulative effects assessment.  

It is anticipated that some of the reasonably foreseeable developments identified in the Acoustic LSA and 
listed in Tables 7.1A-C will also increase ambient noise levels during construction of the Project. Although 
construction schedules for these developments are unknown, for the purposes of the cumulative effects 
assessment for the acoustic environment, it was assumed they would be constructed during the same 
construction period as the Project.  

The overall cumulative effect on the acoustic environment within the Acoustic Environment RSA is 
considered to be of low magnitude remote location and lack of permanent receptors and given that the 
Project is within the permissible sound levels outlined in Directive 038. 

The Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on the acoustic environment within the Acoustic 
Environment RSA is considered reversible in the long-term since the cumulative increase in nuisance noise 
will be alleviated when the operations period of the Project is complete (Table 7.12, point [a]).  

7.2.4.3 Summary 

As identified in Table 7.12, there are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of a 
permanent or long-term cumulative effect of high magnitude that cannot be technically or economically 
mitigated. Consequently, the Project contribution to cumulative effects on the acoustic environment within 
the Acoustic Environment LSA will be not significant. 

7.2.5 Fish and Fish Habitat 

7.2.5.1 Potential Cumulative Effects 

The potential and likely residual environmental effects associated with the construction and operations of 
the proposed pipeline on fish and fish habitat were identified in Section 6.2.7 and are listed in Table 7.13 
along with the identification of existing activities and known reasonably foreseeable developments acting 
in combination with the proposed pipeline. No potential effects were identified for activities related to the 
construction and operations of the proposed Leismer East Compressor Station since the station will not be 
located within 30 m of any fish-bearing waterbody. Therefore, no cumulative effects analysis of the 
compressor station is warranted. No potential cumulative effects were identified for temporary blockage of 
fish movement during isolated watercourse crossings and, consequently, no further analysis is required.  

TABLE 7.13 
 

POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF THE PROPOSED PIPELINE ON FISH  
AND FISH HABITAT CONSIDERED FOR THE CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ASSESSMENT 

Potential  
Residual Effect 

Spatial 
Boundary1 Component 

Temporal 
Boundary 

Potential 
Cumulative 

Effect 

Existing Activities/Reasonably  
Foreseeable Developments with Residual  

Effects Acting in Combination with the Project 
1. Alteration or loss 

of riparian 
vegetation within 
the construction  
right-of-way and 
temporary 
workspace 
during 
construction 
activities 

RSA Pipeline  Past Development 
to Construction 

Increased 
riparian 
disturbance. 

Existing activities/disturbance: timber harvesting, 
transmission development, transportation development, 
oil and gas exploration and development, and fire. 
Reasonably foreseeable pipeline developments within the 
RSA listed in Tables 7.1A-C. 
Pipeline-related activities that could interact include 
clearing, strippings salvaging, grading and trenching, 
backfilling and reclamation of approaches to watercourse 
crossings, vehicle crossing installation and removal, and 
bank reclamation. 

 

 
   

Page 7-30 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 7.13  Cont’d 

Potential  
Residual Effect 

Spatial 
Boundary1 Component 

Temporal 
Boundary 

Potential 
Cumulative 

Effect 

Existing Activities/Reasonably  
Foreseeable Developments with Residual  

Effects Acting in Combination with the Project 
2. Alteration of 

instream habitat 
within the ZOI at 
trenched 
crossings and 
temporary 
vehicle 
crossings 

RSA Pipeline Past Development 
to Construction 

Incremental 
change in fish 
habitat. 

Existing activities/disturbance: timber harvesting, 
transmission development, transportation development, 
oil and gas exploration and development, and fire. 
Reasonably foreseeable pipeline developments within the 
RSA listed in Tables 7.1A-C. 
Pipeline-related activities that could interact include 
clearing, strippings salvaging, grading, trenching, 
backfilling and reclamation of approaches to watercourse 
crossings, vehicle crossing installation and removal, and 
bank reclamation. 

3. Increase in 
suspended 
solids 
concentration on 
fish and fish 
habitat during 
instream 
construction at 
trenched 
crossings within 
the ZOI 

RSA Pipeline Construction 

4. Temporary 
blockage of fish 
movement 
during isolated 
watercourse 
crossings 

RSA Pipeline Construction N/A No projects/activities with residual effects acting in 
combination with the proposed pipeline route have been 
identified. 

Note: 1 RSA = Aquatics RSA. 
 

7.2.5.2 Significance Evaluation of Potential Cumulative Effects 

A combination of quantitative and qualitative methods was considered the most appropriate method to 
evaluate the significance of potential cumulative effects on fish and fish habitat, depending on the 
availability of quantitative data and accepted standards, guidelines and ecological thresholds. Where 
appropriate, the qualitative assessment relied on available literature research and the professional 
judgement of the assessment team. 

A summary of the significance evaluation of the contribution of pipeline construction and operations 
contribution to potential cumulative effects on fish and fish habitat is provided in Table 7.14. The rationale 
used to evaluate the significance of each of the cumulative effects is provided below. 

TABLE 7.14 
 

SIGNIFICANCE EVALUATION OF THE PROJECT’S  
CONTRIBUTION TO CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ON FISH AND FISH HABITAT 

Potential Incremental 
Cumulative Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 

a. Increased riparian 
habitat disturbance 

Impact Balance: Negative The contribution of pipeline construction and operations contribution to increased 
riparian habitat disturbance, in combination with existing activities and known 
foreseeable developments, will result in a negative impact. 

Spatial Boundary: Aquatics 
RSA 

The Project may interact with existing and reasonably foreseeable developments within 
the Aquatics RSA to have cumulative effects on riparian habitat disturbance.  

Duration: Short-Term The events causing cumulative changes in riparian habitat will occur during the 
construction phase or be completed within any one year during the operations phase of 
the Project. 

Frequency: Isolated to 
Occasional 

The events causing cumulative changes in riparian habitat occurs during the 
construction phase intermittently, but sometimes sporadically, over the assessment 
period. 

 
   

Page 7-31 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 7.14  Cont’d 

Potential Incremental 
Cumulative Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 

a. Increased riparian 
habitat disturbance 
(cont’d) 

Reversibility: Medium to 
Long-Term 

Depending on the pre-existing vegetation community (e.g., grasses and shrubs 
regenerate within several years, however, tree canopy regrowth is expected to extend 
into the long-term). 

Magnitude: Low The Project will implement federal and provincial guidance recommendations, and the 
proposed pipeline route will follow existing linear disturbances and, consequently, will 
not substantially contribute to total riparian disturbances in the Aquatics RSA. 

Probability: High Clearing or disturbance of riparian vegetation is expected to occur at all trenched 
watercourse crossings, and any existing activities and/or reasonably foreseeable 
developments within the Aquatics RSA occurring in proximity to watercourses have the 
potential to cause changes in riparian habitat. 

Confidence: High Based on the experience of the assessment team. 
Significance: Not Significant  The disturbance to riparian habitat is considered to be of low magnitude and reversible 

in the medium to long-term and is therefore not significant. 
b. Incremental change in 

fish or fish habitat 
Impact Balance: Negative The pipeline construction and operations contribution of the incremental change in fish 

or fish habitat, in combination with existing activities and known foreseeable 
developments, will result in a negative impact. 

Spatial Boundary: Aquatics 
RSA 

The Project may interact with existing and reasonably foreseeable developments within 
the Aquatics RSA to have cumulative effects on changes in fish and fish habitat. 

Duration: Short-Term The events causing cumulative changes to fish and fish habitat will occur during the 
construction phase or be completed within any one year during the operations phase of 
the Project. 

Frequency: Isolated to 
Occasional 

The events causing cumulative changes in riparian habitat occurs during the 
construction phase intermittently, but sometimes sporadically, over the assessment 
period. 

Reversibility: Short-Term Cumulative changes to fish and fish habitat resulting from alteration of instream habitat 
or increased suspended solids are reversed once construction of the Project is 
completed. 

Magnitude: Low  Cumulative changes to fish and fish habitat is considered to be within environmental 
standards given the implementation of industry standard guidelines, and federal and 
provincial recommended mitigation measures. 

Probability: High The disturbance of fish and fish habitat has occurred in the past and is likely to occur as 
a result of the Project and other reasonably foreseeable developments within the 
Aquatics RSA. 

Confidence: High Based on the experience of the assessment team. 
Significance: Not Significant  The incremental change in fish or fish habitat is considered to be of low magnitude and 

reversible in the short-term and is, therefore, not significant.  
c. Combined cumulative 

effects on fish and fish 
habitat 

Impact Balance: Negative The proposed pipeline construction and operations contribution to combined cumulative 
effects on fish and fish habitat, in combination with existing activities and known 
foreseeable developments, will result in a negative impact. 

Spatial Boundary: Aquatics 
RSA 

The Project may interact with existing and reasonably foreseeable developments within 
the Aquatics RSA to have cumulative effects on fish and fish habitat.  

Duration: Short-Term The events causing cumulative combined effects on fish and habitat will occur during 
the construction phase or be completed within any one year during the operations 
phase of the Project. 

Frequency: Isolated to 
Occasional 

The events causing cumulative changes in riparian habitat occurs during the 
construction phase intermittently, but sometimes sporadically, over the assessment 
period. 

Reversibility: Medium to 
Long-Term 

Depending on the pre-existing vegetation community (e.g., grasses and shrubs 
regenerate within several years, however, tree canopy regrowth is expected to extend 
into the long-term). 

Magnitude: Low The contribution of proposed pipeline construction and operations contribution to 
combined cumulative effects on fish and fish habitat is considered to be within 
environmental standards given the implementation of industry standard guidelines and 
federal and provincial recommended mitigation measures. 

Probability: High It is likely that these combined cumulative residual effects will occur. 
Confidence: High Based on the experience of the assessment team. 
Significance: Not Significant  The pipeline construction and operations contribution to the combined cumulative effect 

on fish and fish habitat is of high probability, reversible in the medium to long-term and 
of low magnitude and, therefore, considered not significant.  

 
   

Page 7-32 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Note: Significant Residual Environmental Effect: A high probability of occurrence of a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot 

be technically or economically mitigated. 
 

Riparian Area Disturbance 
Given the remoteness of the Project area, many of the riparian areas within the Aquatics RSA are 
considered to be relatively intact. Existing activities which have disturbed riparian areas include timber 
harvesting, oil and gas development, and transportation (i.e., road infrastructure, railways). It is anticipated 
that the Project and reasonably foreseeable pipeline developments (as identified in Table 7.1A) will act 
cumulatively to increase riparian disturbance within the Aquatics RSA.  

Salmo Consulting Inc. (Salmo) et al. (2003) provided an overview of watershed assessment models and 
indicators, and reported that stream crossing density and total disturbance within riparian areas are 
commonly used cumulative effects techniques. They also found that these techniques have been 
successfully used in western North America (e.g., Sawyer and Mayhood 1996, Scrimgeour et al. 2003). 
Salmo et al. (2003) also reported that disturbances in riparian areas (e.g., clearings, seismic cutlines, 
pipeline rights-of-way, and road/trail networks) can contribute to increased sediment yields 
(e.g., Anderson et al. 1998, Beaudry 1998, CAPP et al. 2012, Scrimgeour et al. 2003) and affect fish 
community assemblages (e.g., Haas 2001, Sloat et al. 2003). Since the same information required to 
calculate stream crossing densities is necessary to calculate total disturbance in riparian areas, total 
disturbance in riparian areas was considered an appropriate indicator for a quantitative analysis of 
cumulative effects on riparian vegetation, and fish and fish habitat. Similar approaches have been used for 
cumulative effects analysis by Dillon Consulting Ltd. and Salmo (2005) and Salmo et al. (2003).  

The cumulative effects on the riparian areas within the Aquatics RSA were assessed through a desktop 
evaluation. A calculation was conducted to determine the total riparian area disturbed due to existing 
activities, the Project and reasonably foreseeable development activities.  

Criteria based on channel width exists for protecting riparian areas from development activities (e.g., BC 
Ministry of Forests [1995] uses Riparian Management zones that range from 70 m for large fish-bearing 
watercourses to 30 m for small nonfish-bearing watercourses), which resulted in the use of a standardized 
riparian width of 30 m in the calculation of total riparian area disturbed for all watercourses. Disturbance of 
riparian areas associated with the proposed pipeline construction and operations, existing activities and 
reasonably foreseeable development activities were determined. 

The list of existing and foreseeable developments outlined in Tables 7.1A-C was reviewed to determine 
which projects and activities are likely to overlap spatially or temporally with the proposed pipeline 
construction and operations to have a cumulative interaction. 

The results of the quantitative analysis of cumulative effects on riparian vegetation are summarized in 
Table 7.15. Within the Aquatics RSA, approximately 188.4 ha (2.0%) of riparian habitat has been affected 
through surface disturbance associated with existing activities. When combined with the proposed pipeline 
construction and operations, and reasonably foreseeable development activities, the total cumulative effect 
in the Aquatics RSA (i.e., existing disturbance, disturbance attributed to the Project, reasonably foreseeable 
disturbance) is predicted to be approximately 202.2 ha. This incrementally increases the percentage of 
disturbed riparian habitat in the Aquatics RSA to approximately 2.2% of which the proposed pipeline 
contributes 0.84% to the total cumulative effects on riparian habitat, in the Aquatics RSA. 

TABLE 7.15 
 

ESTIMATED DISTURBANCES OF RIPARIAN AREAS WITHIN THE AQUATICS RSA 

Riparian Disturbance Scenario 
Area and Percentage of Riparian Areas 

within Aquatics RSA 
Existing Riparian Disturbance  
Total Riparian Areas  9378.4 ha 
Area of Disturbance of Riparian Areas1 188.4 ha (2.0%) 
Estimated Future Riparian Disturbance  

 
   

Page 7-33 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 7.15  Cont'd 

Riparian Disturbance Scenario 
Area and Percentage of Riparian Areas 

within Aquatics RSA 
Amount of Disturbance of Riparian Areas Attributed to the Project2  1.7 ha (0.02%) 
Amount of Disturbance of Riparian Areas in Aquatics RSA Attributed to Reasonably Foreseeable 
Developments (Likely Future) 1 

12.1 ha (0.13%) 

Total Cumulative Riparian Disturbance (Existing + Project + Likely Future) 202.2 ha (2.2%) 
% Contribution of Project to Total Cumulative Riparian Disturbance 0.84% 

Notes: 1 Calculations based on an average of 30 m riparian area on each bank at all waterbodies. 
 2  Calculations based on footprint disturbances provided in Table 7.18 and are approximate.  
 

The mitigation measures outlined in Table 6.2.16 with regards to seeding disturbed riparian areas with an 
approved and native seed mix, will limit the potential for cumulative effects. In addition, it is expected that 
operators of other reasonably foreseeable pipeline developments will implement similar measures since 
they are considered to be industry standard and recommended in federal and provincial guidelines. No 
mitigation measures beyond the Project-specific mitigation already proposed in Table 6.2.16 is deemed to 
be warranted.  

Given that the pipeline route follows existing linear disturbances, the Project’s contribution to total riparian 
disturbances at waterbodies is of low magnitude. The cumulative effect of clearing of riparian vegetation is 
considered to be reversible in the medium to long-term, depending on the pre-existing vegetation 
community (e.g., grasses and shrubs regenerate within several years, but tree canopy re-growth is 
expected to extend into the long-term) (Table 7.14, point a).  

Change in Fish and Fish Habitat 
The Project will act cumulatively with existing activities presented in Table 7.13, such as timber harvesting, 
utility activities, oil and gas development (i.e., pipelines) and transportation (i.e., sediment input from nearby 
roads). The Project may also act cumulatively with reasonably foreseeable (specifically pipelines) (see 
Tables 7.1A-C) within the Aquatics RSA, involving an alteration of instream habitat or increased suspended 
solids and result in an incremental change to fish and fish habitat.  

Trenched pipeline crossings and the installation, use and the removal of temporary vehicle crossings 
associated with the Project, acting in combination with other reasonably foreseeable developments along 
the same watercourses, will likely result in temporary disruption of instream habitat function. However, the 
mitigation measures presented in Table 6.2.16 are industry-standard and have been recommended by 
industry as well as provincial and federal agencies (e.g., CAPP et al. 2012) as effective measures to reduce 
the loss and alteration of instream habitat. It is anticipated that other operators will implement similar 
measures at watercourses affected by their developments or activities. No mitigation measures beyond the 
Project-specific mitigation already proposed in Table 6.2.16 are deemed to be warranted. 

Where flowing conditions occur, the potential exists for trenched crossings to cause suspended solid 
concentrations which exceed the CCME (2002) guidelines. The recommended isolated trenched 
construction methods are included under the Dewatering/Pumping activity of the DFO Self-Assessment 
Process. This activity does not require review by DFO where all the criteria and Measures to Avoid Causing 
Harm to Fish and Fish Habitat (DFO 2013) can be met. However, should any changes to construction 
methods or timing occur to any of these watercourse crossings, the DFO Self-Assessment Process will be 
re-evaluated in order to account for potential changes. A review may be required if serious harm to fish and 
fish habitat cannot be avoided. The mitigation outlined in Table 6.2.16 includes water quality monitoring to 
document potential sediment loading from instream activities where sensitive fish habitat is present. The 
mitigation monitoring, if required, will help ensure any cumulative effect on fish habitat from sediment 
disturbances caused by instream activities is adequately offset.  

The Project’s contribution to cumulative effects of an incremental change in fish and fish habitat is 
considered to be of low magnitude and reversible in the short-term (Table 7.14, point b).  

 
   

Page 7-34 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Combined Cumulative Effects on Fish and Fish Habitat 
The potential cumulative residual effects (i.e., incremental alteration of riparian habitat and incremental 
alteration of fish and fish habitat) may act in combination to affect fish and fish habitat in the Aquatics RSA. 
This impact balance is considered negative. The overall combined cumulative effect of the proposed 
pipeline construction and operations, and other reasonably foreseeable developments on fish and fish 
habitat is of low magnitude. The implementation of mitigation measures described in Section 6.2.7 will 
reduce the severity of cumulative residual effects. The proposed pipeline construction and operations 
contribution to combined cumulative effect on fish and fish habitat is of low magnitude, reversible in the 
medium to long-term and of high probability (Table 7.14, point c).  

7.2.5.3 Summary 

As identified in Table 7.14, there are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of a 
permanent or long-term cumulative effect of high magnitude that cannot be technically or economically 
mitigated. Consequently, the Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on fish and fish habitat within the 
Aquatics RSA will be not significant. 

7.2.6 Wetlands 

7.2.6.1 Potential Cumulative Effects 

The potential and likely environmental residual effects associated with the construction and operations of 
the Project on wetlands were identified in Section 6.2.8 and are listed in Table 7.16 along with the 
identification of existing activities and reasonably foreseeable developments acting in combination with the 
Project. 

TABLE 7.16 
 

POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF THE PROPOSED PIPELINE ON 
WETLANDS CONSIDERED FOR THE CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ASSESSMENT 

Potential Residual Effect 
Spatial 

Boundary1 Component 
Temporal 
Boundary 

Potential 
Cumulative Effect 

Existing Activities/Reasonably  
Foreseeable Developments with Residual 

Effects Acting in Combination with the Project 
1. Loss or alteration of 

wetland habitat function 
during and following 
construction and 
maintenance activities 
until vegetation is 
re-established 

RSA Pipeline Past 
Development to 
Operations 

Increased wetland 
disturbance. 

• Existing activities/disturbance: timber 
harvesting, transmission development, 
transportation development, oil and gas 
exploration and development, and fire. 

• Reasonably foreseeable developments within 
the RSA listed in Table 7.1A-C. 

• Proposed pipeline-related activities that could 
interact include clearing, strippings salvaging, 
trenching, backfilling, vehicle traffic and 
reclamation. 

2. Loss or alteration of 
wetland hydrological 
function during and 
following construction and 
maintenance activities 
until grade and natural 
drainage patterns are 
restored 

RSA Pipeline Past 
Development to 
Operations 

3. Loss or alteration of 
biogeochemical function 
in wetlands during and 
following construction and 
maintenance activities 
until sedimentation is 
controlled and vegetation 
is re-established 

RSA Pipeline Past 
Development to 
Operations 

Note: 1 RSA = Wetland RSA. 
 

 
   

Page 7-35 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
7.2.6.2 Significance Evaluation of Potential Cumulative Effects 

The evaluation of the potential cumulative effect employs a combination of two assessment methodologies: 
quantitative and qualitative. 

A quantitative assessment approach was taken to determine the extent of the Project’s potential wetland 
function disturbance (i.e., potential loss or alteration of wetland function) when combined with existing 
activities and reasonably foreseeable developments. For the purposes of the cumulative effects 
assessment, an average of the wetland distribution within the Wetland RSA will be used (i.e., 33% is 
published as occurring in the Central Mixedwood and Lower Boreal Highland Natural subregions [Natural 
Regions Committee 2006, Natural Resources Canada 2009]). The total area (in hectares) of the Wetland 
RSA was multiplied by the average wetland distribution (i.e., 33%) to establish an estimate of the total 
wetland area within the Wetland RSA. The total wetland area within the Wetland RSA is then cross 
referenced with existing activities, Project-related and reasonably foreseeable developments to estimate 
the area of wetlands potentially disturbed. 

As there is a lack of regulatory thresholds, standards or guidelines relating to disturbance of wetland 
function, the evaluation of significance of each of the potential residual effects was determined by a 
qualitative assessment supported by quantitative information. This assessment relied on available research 
literature and the professional judgement of the assessment team. 

Table 7.17 provides a summary of the significance evaluation of the Project’s contribution to potential 
cumulative effects on wetlands. The rationale used to evaluate the significance of the cumulative effect is 
provided below. All assessment criteria were considered when determining the significance of the 
cumulative effect, but the most influential assessment criteria were magnitude and reversibility. 

TABLE 7.17 
 

SIGNIFICANCE EVALUATION OF THE PROPOSED  
PIPELINE’S CONTRIBUTION TO CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ON WETLANDS 

Potential Incremental 
Cumulative Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 

a.  Increased wetland 
disturbance 

Impact Balance: Negative The effect has a net loss or is a detriment to the environment condition. 
Spatial Boundary: Wetland 
RSA 

The size of the Wetland RSA is considered by the assessment team to be the 
appropriate spatial scale where potential cumulative effects may occur and are 
considered to be non-trivial. 

Duration: Short-Term Pipeline activities that contribute to cumulative wetland disturbance are anticipated to 
be conducted during the construction phase or completed within any one year during 
the operations phase. 

Frequency: Periodic Pipeline activities contributing to cumulative effects on loss or alteration of wetland 
function could occur intermittently, but repeatedly over the assessment period (i.e., both 
construction and maintenance activities). 

Reversibility: Medium to 
Long-Term 

Depending on the class of wetland, wetland function will be reduced until vegetation 
can be re-established (medium to long-term), grade and natural flow patterns are 
restored (medium-term) and sedimentation is controlled (medium to long-term). For 
example, comparing a treed vs. graminoid wetland, the graminoid wetlands will quickly 
recover to graminoid types whereas treed wetlands will regenerate as emergent 
graminoid-dominant wetlands. 

Magnitude: Low   The Project’s contribution to cumulative wetland disturbance is considered to be within 
environmental standards as appropriate mitigation measures will be implemented (i.e., 
wetland function is anticipated to be restored along the proposed pipeline route). 

Probability: High Disturbance of wetlands is likely to occur as a result of pipeline installation acting in 
combination with existing activities and reasonably foreseeable developments. 

Confidence: High Based on experience with similar pipeline projects within the Wetland RSA, the results 
of the wetland surveys within the Wetland LSA and Footprint Study Area and the 
professional experience of the assessment team. 

Significance: Not Significant  The increased disturbance to wetlands is considered to be of low magnitude and is 
reversible in the medium to long-term and therefore considered not significant.  

Note: Residual Environmental Effect: A high probability of occurrence of a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot be 
technically or economically mitigated. 

 
 

   
Page 7-36 

 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Wetlands (i.e., peatlands) have a relatively high cover representation throughout the Wetland RSA when 
compared to other natural subregions of northern Alberta. Wetlands comprise approximately 25 to 40% 
(average of 33%) of the portion of the Central Mixedwood and Lower Boreal Highlands Natural subregions 
in which the Project is located (Natural Regions Committee 2006).  

Permanent loss of wetland function is not anticipated to result from either the construction or operation 
phases of the pipeline in trenched wetlands through the implementation of mitigation measures. Alteration 
of wetland habitat function may result during pipeline construction (e.g., graminoid wetlands will quickly 
recover to graminoid-dominant wetlands whereas treed wetlands will regenerate as emergent graminoid-
dominant wetlands). Alteration to wetland hydrological function may result from the vegetation removal and 
the altered capacity for species to uptake available groundwater. Additionally, alteration to wetland 
biogeochemical function may result if there is a significant shift in moisture regime resulting from vegetation 
removal (e.g., alteration in water column composition). Consequently, alteration of wetland function is 
considered in the potential for cumulative effects of the Project’s contribution to wetland disturbance. 

Tables 7.1A-C of Section 7.1 provide a list of the reasonably foreseeable developments located within the 
Wetland RSA considered in the evaluation of cumulative effects on loss or alteration of wetland function.  

Since surface disturbances affect wetland function, existing activities, and the Project will act cumulatively 
with reasonably foreseeable developments (Tables 7.1A-C) to increase disturbance of wetland function in 
the Wetland RSA. A qualitative approach supported by quantitative information was selected to determine 
the Project’s contribution to the cumulative effect on wetlands since the change to this parameter over 
existing conditions can be quantified. Due to a lack of established thresholds, standards or guidelines 
relating to wetland disturbance, the evaluation of significance relied on the professional judgement of the 
assessment team. 

The list of existing and reasonably foreseeable developments outlined in Tables 7.1A-C was reviewed to 
determine which projects and activities are likely to overlap spatially or temporally with the Project to have 
a cumulative interaction. 

The current level of disturbance due to existing activities within the Wetland RSA as well as the anticipated 
disturbance attributed to the Project and reasonably foreseeable developments is provided in Table 7.18. 
A hierarchy table (Table 7.2) was applied during the quantitative cumulative effects assessment analysis 
to determine priority of overlapping land use features (i.e., features with greater indirect footprint and 
assumed effects potential are assigned a higher priority). 

Table 7.18 illustrates the current levels of disturbance attributed to various land use features and 
disturbances, as well as the anticipated disturbance attributed to the construction of the Project and 
reasonably foreseeable developments. Numbers are used in the table headings to clarify the values 
presented, where [1] is the area of existing disturbance in the Wetland RSA, [2] is the incremental area of 
disturbance attributed to the Project, and [3] is the incremental area of disturbance attributed to reasonably 
foreseeable developments. Overall cumulative disturbance in the Wetland RSA is presented for Project 
conditions [1+2] and for cumulative conditions [1+2+3].  

TABLE 7.18 
 

PREDICTED CHANGE IN AREA OF DISTURBANCE IN THE WETLAND RSA 

Disturbance 
Feature/Land Use 

Feature 

Existing 
Conditions Project Conditions Reasonably Foreseeable Future Conditions 
Area (ha) of 
Disturbance 

(1) 

Change (ha) from 
Existing 

(2) 

Area (ha) of 
Disturbance 

(1+2) 

Change (ha) 
from Project 

(3) 

Change (ha) 
from Existing 

(2+3) 

Area (ha) of 
Disturbance 

(1+2+3) 
Cities/Towns/Communities 5.1 0.0 5.1 0.0 0.0 5.1 
Airports/Airfields 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 
Primary Roads 181.9 0.0 181.9 148.6 148.6 330.5 
Quarries/Mines/Aggregates 89.1 0.0 89.1 -3.4 -3.4 85.8 

 
   

Page 7-37 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

 TABLE 7.18  Cont'd 

Disturbance 
Feature/Land Use 

Feature 

Existing 
Conditions Project Conditions Reasonably Foreseeable Future Conditions 
Area (ha) of 
Disturbance 

(1) 

Change (ha) from 
Existing 

(2) 

Area (ha) of 
Disturbance 

(1+2) 

Change (ha) 
from Project 

(3) 

Change (ha) 
from Existing 

(2+3) 

Area (ha) of 
Disturbance 

(1+2+3) 
Commercial/Industrial 
Facilities/Features or Oil 
and Gas Facilities 

232.8 8.4 241.2 29.0 37.4 270.2 

Secondary Roads 104.1 0.0 104.1 -0.9 -0.9 103.2 
Railways 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 
Well Sites 677.5 0.0 677.5 -4.9 -4.9 672.6 
Tertiary/Access Roads 322.6 0.2 322.8 -0.4 -0.2 322.4 
Buildings 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 
Recreational Sites 5.7 0.0 5.7 -1.7 -1.7 4.1 
Agriculture Land 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 
Pipelines 1,433.4 95.2 1,528.6 240.6 335.8 1,769.2 
Temporary Workspace 0.0 24.0 24.0 -0.2 23.8 23.8 
Transmission/Power Lines 119.1 -0.1 118.9 -0.5 -0.7 118.4 
Cutlines 1,951.5 -6.1 1,945.4 -5.5 -11.6 1,939.9 
Trails (Recreation) 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 
Cutblocks 8,805.7 -6.0 8,799.6 -24.6 -30.7 8,775.0 
Total Area of Disturbance 
(ha) 

13,928.6  14,044.1   14,420.3 

Total Area of Change (ha)  115.5  376.1 491.7  
Total Area of Wetland RSA: 176,792.9 ha 

Note: Numbers are used in the table headings to clarify the values presented, where (1) is the area of existing disturbance in the RSA, (2) is the 
incremental area of disturbance attributed to the Project, and (3) is the incremental area of disturbance attributed to foreseeable future 
developments. Cumulative disturbance is presented for Project Conditions (1+2) and Foreseeable Future Conditions (1+2+3). 

 

The results of the qualitative assessment supported by quantitative analysis of disturbance of wetlands are 
summarized in Table 7.19. Within the Wetland RSA, approximately 4,596.4 ha (7.9%) of the wetlands have 
been previously affected through surface disturbance associated with existing activities. In combination with 
the Project and reasonably foreseeable developments, the total cumulative disturbance of wetlands within 
the Wetland RSA is predicted to be approximately 4,758.7 ha. This increases the percentage of disturbance 
of wetlands in the Wetland RSA to 8.2% of which the Project contributes 0.8% of the total cumulative 
disturbance of wetlands in the Wetland RSA. 

TABLE 7.19 
 

CUMULATIVE DISTURBANCE OF WETLANDS IN THE WETLAND RSA 

Wetland Disturbance Assessment Scenario 

Area Wetland 
Disturbance in 
Wetland RSA Percent 

Existing Disturbance to Wetlands 
Amount of Wetlands 58,341.7 ha 33% 
Amount of Wetland Disturbance Attributed to Existing Activities (Existing) 1 4,596.4 ha 7.9% 
Estimated Future Wetland Disturbance 
Amount of Wetland Disturbance Attributed to the Proposed Pipeline (Proposed Pipeline) 38.1 ha 0.1% 
Amount of Wetland Disturbance Attributed to Reasonably Foreseeable Developments 
(Reasonably Foreseeable) 1 

124.1 ha 0.2% 

Predicted Cumulative Wetland Disturbance 
Total Cumulative Wetland Disturbance (Existing + Proposed Pipeline+ Reasonably 
Foreseeable) 

4,758.8 ha 8.2% 

% Contribution of Proposed Pipeline to Cumulative Wetland Disturbance -- 0.8% 

Note: 1 Calculations based on footprint disturbances provided in Table 7.18 are approximate. 

 
   

Page 7-38 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
The proposed standard and effective mitigation measures to be implemented during construction through 
wetlands crossed by the pipeline route (see Table 6.2.18) will reduce cumulative effects on wetlands. It is 
anticipated that other operators will implement similar best management practices and mitigation measures 
at wetlands affected by their developments since these are industry standards. No mitigation measures 
beyond the proposed pipeline-specific mitigation in Table 6.2.18 are deemed to be warranted. With the 
implementation of the recommended mitigation measures, the Project’s contribution to cumulative effects 
on wetland disturbance is anticipated to be of low magnitude. The reversibility of the cumulative effect on 
wetlands is considered medium to long-term depending upon the recoverability of wetland habitat function 
(e.g., treed versus graminiod wetland), until vegetation cover is re-established. In addition, other wetland 
functions (i.e., hydrology and biogeochemistry) will be reduced until vegetation cover is re-established 
(Table 7.17, point a).  

7.2.6.3 Summary 

As identified in Table 7.17, there are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of a 
permanent or long-term cumulative effect of high magnitude that cannot be technically or economically 
mitigated. Consequently, it is concluded that the Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on wetlands 
within the Wetland RSA will be not significant. 

7.2.7 Vegetation 

7.2.7.1 Potential Cumulative Effects 

The potential and likely environmental residual effects associated with construction and operations of the 
Project on vegetation were identified in Section 6.2.9 and are listed in Table 7.20 along with the identification 
of existing activities and reasonably foreseeable developments acting in combination with the Project.  

TABLE 7.20 
 

POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF THE PROJECT ON  
VEGETATION CONSIDERED FOR THE CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ASSESSMENT 

Potential Residual Effects 
Spatial 

Boundary1 Component 
Temporal 
Boundary 

Potential Cumulative 
Effects 

Existing Activities/Reasonably Foreseeable 
Developments with Residual Effects  

Acting in Combination with the Project 
1. Alteration of 

approximately 115 ha of 
native vegetation 

RSA Pipeline and 
compressor 
station  

Past 
Development 
to Operations 

Incremental change to 
native vegetation 
community composition. 

• Existing activities/disturbance: timber 
harvesting, transmission development, 
transportation development, oil and gas 
exploration and development, and fire. 

• Reasonably foreseeable developments 
within the RSA are listed in Table 7.1A-C. 

• Project-related activities that could interact 
include clearing, strippings salvaging, 
grading, backfilling and reclamation. 

2. Loss or alteration of 
rare plant populations or 
rare ecological 
communities 

RSA Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

Past 
Development 
to Operations 

Alteration of rare plant 
occurrences or rare 
ecological communities. 

• Existing activities/disturbance: timber 
harvesting, transmission development, 
transportation development, oil and gas 
exploration and development, and fire. 

• Reasonably foreseeable developments 
within the RSA are listed in Table 7.1A-C. 

• Project-related activities that could interact 
include clearing, strippings salvaging, 
grading, backfilling and reclamation. 

 

 
   

Page 7-39 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 7.20  Cont'd 

Potential Residual Effects 
Spatial 

Boundary1 Component 
Temporal 
Boundary 

Potential Cumulative 
Effects 

Existing Activities/Reasonably Foreseeable 
Developments with Residual Effects  

Acting in Combination with the Project 
3. Weed introduction 

and/or spread 
RSA Pipeline and 

compressor 
station 

Past 
Development 
to Operations 

Weed introduction 
and/or spread. 

• Existing activities/disturbance: timber 
harvesting, transmission development, 
transportation development, oil and gas 
exploration and development, and fire. 

• Reasonably foreseeable developments 
within the RSA are listed in Table 7.1A-C. 

• Project-related activities that could interact 
include strippings salvaging, storage and 
replacement, reclamation and any activities 
occurring during construction or 
decommissioning activities which require 
equipment travel over areas where 
vegetation has been removed, as well as 
operations. 

Note: 1 RSA = Vegetation RSA. 
 

7.2.7.2 Significance Evaluation of Potential Cumulative Effects 

A combination of quantitative and qualitative methods was considered the most appropriate method to 
evaluate the significance of potential cumulative effects on vegetation, depending on the availability of 
quantitative data and accepted standards, guidelines and ecological thresholds. Where appropriate, the 
qualitative assessment relied on available literature research and the professional judgement of the 
assessment team.  

Table 7.21 provides a summary of the significance evaluation of the Project’s contribution to potential 
cumulative effects on vegetation. The rationale used to evaluate the significance of each of the cumulative 
effects is provided in below. 

TABLE 7.21 
 

SIGNIFICANCE EVALUATION OF THE PROJECT’S 
CONTRIBUTION TO CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ON VEGETATION 

Potential Incremental 
Cumulative Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 

a. Incremental change to 
native vegetation 
community composition 

Impact Balance: Negative There will be incremental change to native vegetation composition. 
Spatial Boundary: Vegetation 
RSA 

The Vegetation RSA is considered by the assessment team to be the appropriate 
spatial scale where potential cumulative effects are considered to be non-trivial. 

Duration: Short-Term The events resulting in cumulative changes to native vegetation composition will occur 
during the construction phase or be completed within one to ten years during the 
operations phase of the Project. 

Frequency: Periodic The events resulting in change to native vegetation community composition occur 
intermittently, but repeatedly, over the assessment period. 

Reversibility: Medium to 
Long-Term 

Depending upon the associated land use and the interaction with Project components, 
the type of development and the growth time required for species in each affected area 
(e.g., forb versus tree), changes to native vegetation community composition are 
reversible in the medium to long-term. 

Magnitude: Low Since the Project’s contribution to incremental cumulative change to native vegetation 
community composition is less than 1% of the Vegetation RSA, it is considered to be 
well within the social and regulatory standards of land use change for the municipalities 
encountered by the Project. 

Probability: High Proposed clearing activities for the Project and reasonably foreseeable developments, 
in addition to past clearing for existing activities, are known to occur or have occurred 
on lands supporting native vegetation. 

 

 
   

Page 7-40 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 7.21  Cont’d 

Potential Incremental 
Cumulative Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 

a. Incremental change to 
native vegetation 
community composition 
(cont’d) 

Confidence: High Based on the results from field surveys conducted for the Project, past pipeline projects 
and the experience of the assessment team. 

Significance: Not Significant  The cumulative incremental change to native vegetation composition is considered 
reversible in the medium to long-term and is of low magnitude and therefore not 
significant. 

b. Alteration of rare plant 
occurrences or rare 
ecological communities  

Impact Balance: Negative A disturbance or alteration to a portion of the rare plant population or rare ecological 
community may occur. 

Spatial Boundary: Vegetation 
RSA 

The Vegetation RSA is considered by the assessment team to be the appropriate 
spatial scale where potential cumulative effects are considered to be non-trivial. 

Duration: Short-Term The events resulting in cumulative changes to rare plant populations will occur during 
the construction phase or be completed within any one year during the operations 
phase of the Project. Though construction may be greater than one year, effects to rare 
plants and rare ecological communities primarily associated with the clearing phase of 
construction is expected to be completed within any one year for this project or 
reasonably foreseeable developments. 

Frequency: Periodic The events causing potential disturbance or alteration of a rare plant population or rare 
ecological community (i.e., clearing of the Project) is confined to a specific period. 

Reversibility: Medium to 
Long-Term  

Depending upon the species, habitat sensitivity and population demographics of rare 
plant populations, rare ecological communities, and associated Element Occurrences 
directly or indirectly affected by construction activities of the Project. 

Magnitude: Low to Medium  No single rare plant Element Occurrence or substantial proportion thereof (i.e., rare 
plant populations), is anticipated to be altered due to construction of the Project 
following implementation of recommended mitigation measures. 

Probability: High The Project is located on predominantly native lands, and a number of rare plant 
populations have been observed along adjacent NGTL rights-of-way. 

Confidence: High Rare plant surveys have been completed for the Project. 
Significance: Not Significant  There are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of a permanent 

or long-term cumulative effect of high magnitude that cannot be technically or 
economically mitigated. 

c. Weed introduction and/or 
spread 

Impact Balance: Negative Introduction and/or spread of weeds to a portion of the Project may occur. 
Spatial Boundary: Vegetation 
RSA 

The Vegetation RSA is considered by the assessment team to be the appropriate 
spatial scale where potential cumulative effects are considered to be non-trivial. 

Duration: Short to 
medium-term 

The events resulting in cumulative effects on weeds will occur during the construction 
phase or be completed within any one year during the operations phase of the Project. 

Frequency: Periodic The events resulting in introduction and spread of weeds and invasive, non-native 
species occur intermittently, but repeatedly, over the assessment period. 

Reversibility: Short to 
Medium-Term 

Reversibility will be shortened with the application of mitigation measures for weeds, 
however, reversibility will vary from short to medium-term depending on the species, 
associated land use and the density/distribution of the occurrence.  

Magnitude: Low Given the species, affected land use and density/distribution of associated weed 
occurrences, the Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on weeds is expected to be 
within the requirements of the Alberta Weed Control Act. 

Probability: High Weeds and invasive, non-native species are known to occur along the proposed 
pipeline route and compressor station site and are likely to occur throughout the 
Vegetation RSA. 

Confidence: High Based on past pipeline projects and the experience of the assessment team. 
Significance: Not Significant  The residual effect is considered to be reversible in the short to medium-term and of 

low magnitude and is therefore not significant.  
d. Combined cumulative 

effects on native 
vegetation 

Impact Balance: Negative The combined effects of the individual potential residual effects could act in 
combination and then may act cumulatively with reasonably foreseeable developments 
in areas of non-native vegetation. 

Spatial Boundary: Vegetation 
RSA 

The Vegetation RSA is considered by the assessment team to be the appropriate 
spatial scale where potential cumulative effects are considered to be non-trivial. 

Duration: Short-term The events resulting in combined cumulative effects on native vegetation will occur 
during the construction phase or be completed within any one year during the 
operations phase of the Project. 

Frequency: Periodic The events resulting in combined cumulative effects on native vegetation occur 
intermittently, but repeatedly, over the assessment period. 

 
   

Page 7-41 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 7.21  Cont’d 

Potential Incremental 
Cumulative Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 

d. Combined cumulative 
effects on native 
vegetation (cont’d) 

Reversibility: Short to 
Long-Term 

Depending upon the associated land use and the growth time required for species in 
each affected area (e.g., forb versus tree), the Project’s contribution to combined 
cumulative effects on native vegetation is considered reversible in the medium to long-
term. 

Magnitude: Low  The Project's overall contribution (115.1 ha) to combined cumulative effects on native 
vegetation is less when compared to reasonably foreseeable developments (155.6 ha), 
however, in consideration of the level of disturbance to native vegetation from existing 
activities (1174.4 ha), the Project’s contribution to combined cumulative effects on 
native vegetation is low. 

Probability: High The Project traverses known locations of native vegetation and areas with the 
probability of encountering locations with weeds. 

Confidence: Moderate to High Based on past pipeline projects and the experience of the assessment team. 
Significance: Not Significant  There are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of a permanent 

or long-term cumulative effect of high magnitude that cannot be technically or 
economically mitigated. 

Note: Residual Environmental Effect: A high probability of occurrence of a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot be 
technically or economically mitigated. 

 

Change in Native Vegetation Community Composition 
Since clearing activities involve the removal of trees, existing activities, the Project, and reasonably 
foreseeable developments (as identified in Tables 7.1 A,B and C) will act cumulatively to affect vegetation 
communities in the Vegetation RSA.  

Existing activities that have resulted in clearing in the Vegetation RSA include timber harvesting, utility 
activities, transportation development and oil and gas exploration and development. The amount of 
disturbance to native vegetation and clearing in the area as a result of the Project is reduced by paralleling 
existing rights-of-way for approximately 28 km (77%). NGTL is expected to further reduce the amount of 
disturbance to native vegetation by using existing rights-of-way as temporary work space where feasible. 
Reasonably foreseeable developments which involve clearing activities in the Vegetation RSA are identified 
in Tables 7.1 A,B and C and include pipelines, facilities and wells. 

The list of existing and foreseeable developments outlined in Tables 7.1 A,B and C were reviewed to 
determine which projects and activities are likely to overlap spatially or temporally with the Project to have 
a cumulative interaction. 

Table 7.22 illustrates the current levels of disturbance attributed to various land use features and 
disturbances, as well as the anticipated disturbance attributed to the construction of the Project and 
reasonably foreseeable developments. Numbers are used in the table headings to clarify the values 
presented, where [1] is the area of existing disturbance in the Vegetation RSA, [2] is the incremental area 
of disturbance attributed to the Project, and [3] is the incremental area of disturbance attributed to 
reasonably foreseeable developments. Overall cumulative disturbance in the Vegetation RSA is presented 
for Project conditions [1+2] and for cumulative conditions [1+2+3]. 

TABLE 7.22 
 

PREDICTED CHANGE IN AREA OF DISTURBANCE IN THE VEGETATION RSA 

Disturbance 
Feature/Land Use 

Feature 

Existing 
Conditions Project Conditions Reasonably Foreseeable Future Conditions 
Area (ha) of 
Disturbance 

(1) 

Change (ha) from 
Existing 

(2) 

Area (ha) of 
Disturbance 

(1+2) 

Change (ha) 
from Project 

(3) 

Change (ha) 
from Existing 

(2+3) 

Area (ha) of 
Disturbance 

(1+2+3) 
Cities/Towns/Communities  4.56 0.00 4.56 0.00 0.00 4.56 
Airports/Airfields 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Primary Roads 36.54 0.00 36.54 29.64 29.64 66.18 

 
   

Page 7-42 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 7.22  Cont'd 

Disturbance 
Feature/Land Use 

Feature 

Existing 
Conditions Project Conditions Reasonably Foreseeable Future Conditions 
Area (ha) of 
Disturbance 

(1) 

Change (ha) from 
Existing 

(2) 

Area (ha) of 
Disturbance 

(1+2) 

Change (ha) 
from Project 

(3) 

Change (ha) 
from Existing 

(2+3) 

Area (ha) of 
Disturbance 

(1+2+3) 
Quarries/Mines/Aggregates 67.22 0.00 67.22 0.00 0.00 67.22 
Commercial/Industrial 
Facilities/Features or Oil 
and Gas Facilities 

57.20 8.43 65.63 4.03 12.46 69.66 

Secondary Roads 20.94 0.00 20.94 -0.30 -0.30 20.64 
Railways 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Well Sites  50.06 0.00 50.06 0.00 0.00 50.06 
Tertiary/Access Roads 23.05 0.18 23.23 -0.15 0.03 23.08 
Buildings 0.04 0.00 0.04 0.00 0.00 0.04 
Recreational Sites 1.04 0.00 1.04 0.00 0.00 1.04 
Agricultural Land 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Pipelines 275.30 95.15 370.46 128.34 223.49 498.80 
Temporary Workspace 0.00 24.04 24.04 -0.23 23.81 23.81 
Transmission/Power Lines 23.86 -0.14 23.72 -0.10 -0.24 23.62 
Cutlines 215.46 -6.12 209.34 -2.18 -8.31 207.15 
Trails (Recreation) 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Cutblocks  399.13 -6.02 393.11 -3.43 -9.44 389.68 
Total Area of Disturbance 1174.40  1289.91   1445.55 
Total Area of Vegetation RSA 20010.8 ha 

Note: 1 Numbers are used in the table headings to clarify the values presented, where (1) is the area of existing disturbance in the RSA, (2) is the 
incremental area of disturbance attributed to the Project, and (3) is the incremental area of disturbance attributed to foreseeable future 
developments. Cumulative disturbance is presented for Project Conditions (1+2) and Foreseeable Future Conditions (1+2+3). 

 

The results of the quantitative analysis of disturbance of native vegetation are summarized in Table 7.23. 
Within the Vegetation RSA, approximately 1174.4 ha (5.9%) of the native vegetation has been removed or 
altered by disturbances associated with existing activities. When combined with the Project and reasonably 
foreseeable developments, the total cumulative disturbance of native vegetation within the Vegetation RSA 
is predicted to be approximately 1445.6 ha which increases the percentage of native vegetation disturbed 
within the Vegetation RSA to 7.2% (a change of 1.3%). The Project contributes 1.3% to the total cumulative 
disturbance of native vegetation within the Vegetation RSA. No locally or regionally adopted threshold or 
standard exists against which this incremental change in vegetation composition can be judged. 

TABLE 7.23 
 

CUMULATIVE DISTURBANCE OF NATIVE VEGETATION IN THE VEGETATION RSA 

Native Vegetation Disturbance Scenario Area of Vegetation RSA1 Percent 
Existing Disturbance of Native Vegetation 
Area of the Vegetation RSA 20010.8 ha 100% 
Amount of Native Vegetation Disturbance in the Vegetation RSA Attributed to 
Existing Activities (Existing)1 

1174.4 ha  5.9% 

Estimated Future Native Vegetation Disturbance 
Amount of Native Vegetation Disturbance Attributed to the Project2 115.1 ha  0.6% 
Amount of Native Vegetation Disturbance in the Vegetation RSA Attributed to 
Reasonably Foreseeable Developments (Reasonably Foreseeable)3 

155.6 ha  0.8% 

Predicted Cumulative Native Vegetation Degradation 
Total Cumulative Native Vegetation Disturbance (Existing + Project + Likely Future) 1445.6 ha  7.2% 
% Contribution of Project to Total Cumulative Native Vegetation Disturbance -- 1.3% 

Sources: Refer to Table 7.22 for data sources used for land use features  
Notes:  1 Calculations based on footprint disturbances provided in Table 7.23 and are approximate.  

 
   

Page 7-43 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
 2 The estimated area of new disturbance resulting from the proposed pipeline right-of-way and temporary work space (i.e., excluding areas that 

overlap with existing disturbed areas). 
 3 The estimated area resulting from the construction of reasonably foreseeable developments within the Vegetation RSA for the Project 

(Tables 7.1A-C). 
 

Areas disturbed on lands supporting native vegetation will be allowed to naturally revegetate or will be 
seeded with the appropriate native grass seed mixture. Reasonably foreseeable projects within the 
Vegetation RSA are smaller in size but it is anticipated that other operators of similar developments, such 
as other pipelines in the Vegetation RSA will follow a similar revegetation strategy since it is the preference 
of provincial government agencies responsible for the management of these lands (e.g., AESRD 2013b). 
Consequently, the residual effects of existing activities, the Project and other similar developments are 
primarily related to a change in vegetation rather than a loss of vegetation. However, existing and 
reasonably foreseeable developments in the Vegetation RSA likely represent some loss or long-term 
alteration of native vegetation. No additional mitigation measures beyond the Project-specific mitigation 
already proposed in Table 6.2.20 are deemed to be warranted.  

The overall cumulative effect of the Project and reasonably foreseeable and existing developments on 
native vegetation community composition is anticipated to be of low magnitude. The Project contribution to 
cumulative effects on the native vegetation community composition within the Vegetation RSA is considered 
to be of low magnitude since the effect will represent an incremental change in vegetation composition. 
Reversibility is considered medium to long-term, depending on the time required for various native species 
to re-establish along the disturbed right-of-way (Table 7.21, point a). 

Alteration of Rare Plant Populations or Rare Ecological Communities 
ACIMS provided records of rare plant occurrences known within a 10 km radius of the Project, which 
included two rare vascular plant species, two moss species, one liverwort species and one lichen species 
(ACIMS 2012b). Four of the six rare plant occurrence records provided by ACIMS were of non-vascular 
species (bryophytes and lichens), all at the southeastern end of the Project in the Lower Boreal Highlands 
Natural Subregion. One ACIMS-listed rare plant species, goldthread (S3W) was observed during the 2013 
vegetation survey along the Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline Project and Leismer East 
Compressor Station. No rare ecological communities are known to occur within the Vegetation RSA or were 
observed during the 2013 survey (Appendix 5).  

Ground disturbance will be associated with the Project and the reasonably foreseeable developments 
identified in the Vegetation RSA (Tables 7.1 A,B and C ). These developments will act cumulatively with 
existing activities to potentially affect rare plant occurrences or rare ecological communities in the 
Vegetation RSA. 

Given that existing activities and reasonably foreseeable developments are larger than the Project, it is 
uncertain if the same amount of mitigation will be implemented to reduce disturbance to rare plant 
occurrences. Reasonably foreseeable developments are anticipated to be 155.6 ha (<1%) of the total 
disturbance and the Project is 115.1ha (<1%) of the total disturbance, because these are incremental 
changes to vegetation composition and the Project will implement appropriate mitigation if rare plants or 
rare communities are identified.  

The Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on rare plant populations and rare ecological communities 
within the Vegetation RSA is considered to be reversible in the medium to long-term, depending on the 
species/communities affected, and of low to medium magnitude (Table 7.21, point b).  

Weed Introduction and Spread 
Three Noxious weed species were observed along the pipeline route during the vegetation survey. The 
abundance of weedy species was generally observed to be low and limited to areas of previous disturbance 
in this area. 

Weeds typically establish in areas that have been previously disturbed. Existing activities resulting in ground 
disturbance and potential introduction and spread of weeds include: timber harvesting, utility activities, 
transportation development and oil and gas exploration and development. Since ground disturbance will be 
 

   
Page 7-44 

 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
associated with the Project and reasonably foreseeable developments (as identified in Tables 7.1A,B and 
C ), these will act cumulatively with existing activities to cause the introduction and spread of weeds in the 
Vegetation RSA.  

Because the potential for weed introduction and spread increases with surface disturbance, comparing the 
area of disturbance associated with the Project to that associated with existing disturbances and reasonably 
foreseeable developments provides an indication of the Project’s contribution to this cumulative effect. The 
area of disturbance attributed to existing activities, the Project and reasonably foreseeable developments 
is approximately 1174.4 ha, 115.1 ha and 155.6 ha, respectively (see Table 7.23). Therefore, compared to 
existing activities, the Project’s potential contribution to weed introduction and spread in the Vegetation 
RSA is considered to be low.  

The proposed weed-related mitigation outlined in Section 6.2.9 and in the EPP (Appendix 1) will reduce the 
potential for cumulative effects. Other operators within the Vegetation RSA are expected to implement 
similar industry standard mitigation to control weeds (e.g., AESRD 2013b, 2014). No additional weed 
mitigation beyond the Project-specific mitigation already proposed in Section 6.2.9 is warranted.  

The overall cumulative effect on weeds in the Vegetation RSA as a result of existing activities, the Project 
and reasonably foreseeable developments is considered to be of low magnitude. Implementation of 
effective mitigation measures for the Project and reasonably foreseeable developments will reduce the 
likelihood and the degree to which weeds are introduced or spread in the Vegetation RSA. 

The Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on weed introduction and spread within the Vegetation RSA 
is reversible in the short to medium-term depending on the species and the size of the infestation and of 
low magnitude (Table 7.21, point c).  

Combined Cumulative Effects on Native Vegetation  
The combined cumulative effects evaluation considers the individual potential cumulative residual effects 
that are likely to occur. Therefore, the following potential cumulative effects that are likely to act in 
combination to result in overall effects on native vegetation are: 

• changes to composition of native vegetation; 

• loss or alteration of rare plant populations or rare ecological communities; and 

• weed introduction and spread; 

The cumulative effects identified above may act in combination on native vegetation with the residual effects 
from existing activities and reasonably foreseeable developments in the Vegetation RSA.  

No mitigation measures beyond the Project-specific mitigation already proposed in Table 6.2.20 are 
deemed warranted. The Project's overall contribution (115.1 ha) to combined cumulative effects on native 
vegetation is smaller compared to reasonably foreseeable developments (155.6 ha), as a result, in 
consideration of the level of disturbance to native vegetation from existing activities (1174.4 ha), the 
Project’s contribution to combined cumulative effects on native vegetation is low. Subsequently, the 
magnitude of the combined cumulative effect on native vegetation is considered to be low. The probability 
of the cumulative effects on altering vegetation composition, rare plants and/or rare ecological communities 
and weed introduction and spread acting in combination is high. The Project’s contribution to cumulative 
effects on native vegetation are reversible in the short to long-term depending on the growth time required 
for species in each area (e.g., forb versus tree), rare plant species/communities affected and the type of 
invasive species present (Table 7.21, point d). 

7.2.7.3 Summary 

As identified in Table 7.21, there are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of a 
permanent or long-term cumulative effect of high magnitude that cannot be technically or economically 
mitigated. Consequently, the Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on vegetation within the Vegetation 
RSA will not be significant. 

 
   

Page 7-45 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
7.2.8 Wildlife and Wildlife Habitat 

7.2.8.1 Potential Cumulative Effects 

The potential and likely residual environmental effects associated with the construction and operations of 
the Project on wildlife and wildlife habitat were identified in Section 6.2.10 and are listed in Table 7.24 along 
with the identification of existing activities and reasonably foreseeable developments that have the potential 
to act in combination with the Project contributing to cumulative effects on wildlife and wildlife habitat.  

TABLE 7.24 
 

POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF THE PROJECT ON WILDLIFE AND 
WILDLIFE HABITAT CONSIDERED FOR THE CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ASSESSMENT 

Potential 
Residual Effects 

Spatial 
Boundary1 Component 

Temporal 
Boundary 

Potential 
Cumulative Effect 

Existing Activities/Reasonably Foreseeable 
Developments with Residual Effects Acting in 

Combination with the Project 
1 Changes to 

wildlife habitat 
RSA Pipeline and 

compressor 
station  

Past 
Development 
to 
Operations 

Incremental 
change to wildlife 
habitat. 

• Existing activities/disturbance: timber harvesting, 
transmission development, transportation 
development, oil and gas exploration and 
development, and fire. 

• Reasonably foreseeable developments within the 
RSA are listed in Table 7.1A-C. 

• Project-related activities that could interact to affect 
wildlife habitat include Project construction (including 
but not limited to clearing, soil handling, grading, 
access road and compressor station construction, 
pipeline installation, waste storage and disposal, 
traffic, reclamation) and operation (including but not 
limited to periodic monitoring and maintenance 
activities, traffic). 

2. Changes to 
wildlife 
movement 

RSA Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

Past 
Development 
to 
Operations 

Incremental 
change to wildlife 
movement. 

• Existing activities/disturbance: timber harvesting, 
transmission development, transportation 
development, oil and gas exploration and 
development, and fire. 

• Reasonably foreseeable developments within the 
RSA are listed in Table 7.1A-C. 

• Project-related activities that could interact to affect 
wildlife habitat include Project construction (including 
but not limited to clearing, soil handling, grading, 
access road and compressor station construction, 
pipeline installation, waste storage and disposal, 
traffic, reclamation) and operation (including but not 
limited to periodic monitoring and maintenance 
activities, traffic). 

3. Changes to 
wildlife 
mortality risk 

RSA Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

Past 
Development 
to 
Operations 

Incremental 
change to wildlife 
mortality risk. 

• Existing activities/disturbance: timber harvesting, 
transmission development, transportation 
development, oil and gas exploration and 
development, and fire. 

• Reasonably foreseeable developments within the 
RSA are listed in Table 7.1A-C. 

• Project-related activities that could interact to affect 
wildlife habitat include Project construction (including 
but not limited to clearing, soil handling, grading, 
access road and compressor station construction, 
pipeline installation, waste storage and disposal, 
traffic, reclamation) and operation (including but not 
limited to periodic monitoring and maintenance 
activities, traffic). 

Note: 1 RSA = Wildlife RSA. 
 

 
   

Page 7-46 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
7.2.8.2 Significance Evaluation of Potential Cumulative Effects 

The qualitative assessment method described in Section 6.2.10 was adopted for the characterization and 
significance determination of cumulative adverse effects on wildlife and wildlife habitat. All assessment 
criteria were considered when determining the significance of each cumulative adverse effect. The most 
influential assessment criteria for wildlife and wildlife habitat are magnitude and reversibility. Quantitative 
metrics were completed to inform the characterization of the magnitude of residual cumulative effects, 
where appropriate. 

Table 7.25 provides a summary of the significance evaluation of the Project’s contribution to potential 
cumulative effects on wildlife and wildlife habitat. The rationale used to evaluate the significance of each of 
the cumulative effects is provided below. 

TABLE 7.25 
 

SIGNIFICANCE EVALUATION OF THE PROJECT’S  
CONTRIBUTION TO CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ON WILDLIFE AND WILDLIFE HABITAT 

Potential Incremental 
Cumulative Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 

a. Changes to wildlife 
habitat 

Impact Balance: Negative Construction and operations of the Project will contribute to adverse cumulative effects 
on wildlife habitat as a result of habitat disturbance. 

Spatial Boundary: Wildlife RSA The Project may interact with existing and reasonably foreseeable developments within 
the Wildlife RSA to have cumulative effects on wildlife habitat. 

Duration: Short-Term The events causing potential effects are construction and operational activities 
(e.g., monitoring, vegetation management and site-specific maintenance) that will be 
completed within any one year during operations. 

Frequency: Periodic The events causing potential effects (i.e., clearing of the Project Footprint, traffic and 
activity) will occur during construction and intermittently during operations for 
monitoring, vegetation control and maintenance. 

Reversibility: Long-Term  Regeneration of disturbed vegetation will begin during the operations phase (except for 
portions of the pipeline right-of-way, which will generally be maintained with low 
vegetation for maintenance and operations) and will continue through the 
decommissioning and reclamation phase. Establishment of herbaceous and shrub 
vegetation will occur in a much shorter timeframe than forested habitats, which will take 
decades to regenerate. The Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on wildlife 
habitat are therefore reversible in the long-term, once forest habitat regenerates over 
the Project Footprint. 

Magnitude: Low The Project is estimated to contribute < 0.1% to the proportion of the Wildlife RSA that 
is disturbed. The predicted proportion of disturbed habitat in the Wildlife RSA under 
cumulative conditions (8.2%) is well below the lower regional habitat loss threshold 
(50%) indicated in the available literature. With implementation of the proposed 
mitigation to reduce the Project’s residual adverse effects, the magnitude of the 
Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on wildlife habitat is concluded to be low. 

Probability: High The Project crosses habitat used by wildlife and there are existing activities and 
reasonably foreseeable developments in the Wildlife RSA with potential to act in 
combination with the Project to have an incremental cumulative effect. 

Confidence: High The assessment is based on a good understanding of cause-effect relationships and 
data pertinent to the Project area. 

Significance: Not significant  The Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on wildlife habitat within the Wildlife 
RSA is reversible in the long-term and of low magnitude and is therefore considered not 
significant. 

b Changes to wildlife 
movement 

Impact Balance: Negative Construction and operation of the Project will contribute to adverse cumulative effects 
on wildlife movement as a result of barriers or filters to movement during construction 
and operations, and avoidance or attraction to the Footprint. 

Spatial Boundary: Wildlife RSA The Project may interact with existing and reasonably foreseeable development within 
the Wildlife RSA to have cumulative effects on wildlife movement. 

Duration: Short-Term The events causing potential effects are construction and operational activities 
(e.g., monitoring, vegetation management and site-specific maintenance) that will be 
completed within any one year during operations. 

Frequency: Periodic The events causing potential effects (i.e., clearing of the Project Footprint, traffic and 
activity) will occur during construction and intermittently during operations for 
monitoring, vegetation control and maintenance. 

 
   

Page 7-47 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 7.25  Cont’d 

Potential Incremental 
Cumulative Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 

b Changes to wildlife 
movement (cont’d) 

Reversibility: Long-Term  The Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on changes to wildlife movement are 
reversible in the long-term, once forest habitat regenerates over the Project Footprint. 

Magnitude: Low With the implementation of the recommended mitigation, the Project’s contribution to 
cumulative effects on wildlife movement patterns within the Wildlife RSA is concluded to 
be low in magnitude. 

Probability: High Available literature indicates that research has demonstrated changes in wildlife 
movement as a result of sensory disturbance and habitat changes. The Project will 
incrementally increase width of forest gaps, and is likely to overlap temporally with other 
existing and foreseeable activities and developments in the Wildlife RSA to have a 
cumulative effect on wildlife movement. 

Confidence: High The assessment is based on a good understanding of cause-effect relationships and 
data pertinent to the Project area. 

Significance: Not significant  The Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on wildlife movement within the Wildlife 
RSA is reversible in the long-term and of low magnitude and is therefore considered not 
significant. 

c Changes to wildlife 
mortality risk  

Impact Balance: Negative Construction and operation of the Project will potentially contribute to adverse 
cumulative effects on wildlife mortality risk as a result of habitat disruption, 
human/wildlife conflict or changes in predator/prey dynamics. 

Spatial Boundary: Wildlife RSA The Project may interact with existing and reasonably foreseeable developments within 
the Wildlife RSA to have cumulative effects on wildlife mortality risk. 

Duration: Short-Term The events causing then potential increase in mortality risk due to vehicle/wildlife 
collisions and undiscovered habitat are construction and operational activities (e.g., 
monitoring, vegetation management and site-specific maintenance) that will be 
completed within any one year during operations. 

Frequency: Periodic The events causing potential effects (i.e., clearing of the Project Footprint, traffic and 
activity) will occur during construction and intermittently during operations for 
monitoring, vegetation control and maintenance. 

Reversibility: Long-Term  Incremental effects of increased mortality risk can be mitigated in the short to medium-
term with application of mitigation measures, and are reversible in the long-term once 
forest habitat regenerates over the Project Footprint. 

Magnitude: Low The proposed mitigation aligns with regulatory guidelines, including avoiding creating 
new access, limiting the area of new habitat disturbance and avoiding activities during 
sensitive timing windows for wildlife. With implementation of the proposed mitigation, 
the Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on wildlife mortality risk is concluded to 
be low. 

Probability: High The Project and other existing and reasonably foreseeable developments and activities 
in the Wildlife RSA involve activities that potentially increase the risk of wildlife mortality. 

Confidence: Low The assessment is based on a good understanding of cause-effect relationships and 
data pertinent to the Project area; however, interaction of the Project with amphibians 
during terrestrial life stages is uncertain. 

Significance: Not significant  The Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on wildlife mortality risk within the 
Wildlife RSA is reversible in the long-term and of low magnitude and is therefore 
considered not significant. 

d Combined cumulative 
changes to wildlife and 
wildlife habitat 

Impact Balance: Negative The Project will potentially contribute to adverse cumulative effects on wildlife and 
wildlife habitat as a result of changes in wildlife habitat, movement and mortality risk. 

Spatial Boundary: Wildlife RSA The Project’s contribution to combined changes in habitat, movement and mortality risk 
may interact with existing and reasonably foreseeable developments within the Wildlife 
RSA to have cumulative effects on wildlife and wildlife habitat. 

Duration: Short-Term The events causing potential effects are construction and operational activities (e.g., 
monitoring, vegetation management and site-specific maintenance) that will be 
completed within any one year during operations. 

Frequency: Periodic The events causing potential effects (i.e., clearing of the Project Footprint, traffic and 
activity) will occur during construction and intermittently during operations for 
monitoring, vegetation control and maintenance. 

Reversibility: Long-Term  The Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on wildlife and wildlife habitat are 
reversible in the long-term, once forest habitat regenerates over the Project Footprint. 

Magnitude: Low With implementation of the proposed mitigation, including routing adjacent to existing 
disturbance, reducing the Project Footprint to the extent practical, minimum disturbance 
construction measures that facilitate natural regeneration, and avoiding sensitive 
periods (e.g., migratory bird nesting period or conducting nest sweeps), the combined 
Project effects are expected to be of low magnitude with respect to the Project’s 
contribution to cumulative effects at the regional scale. 

 
   

Page 7-48 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 7.25  Cont’d 

Potential Incremental 
Cumulative Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 

d Combined cumulative 
changes to wildlife and 
wildlife habitat (cont’d) 

Probability: High It is likely that some wildlife will experience combined cumulative effects of the Project 
in combination with existing and reasonably foreseeable activities and developments. 

Confidence: Moderate The assessment is based on good understanding of cause-effect relationships using 
data pertinent to the Project area. Uncertainty associated with mortality risk for some 
wildlife reduces the confidence rating to moderate. 

Significance: Not significant  The Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on wildlife and wildlife habitat within the 
Wildlife RSA is reversible in the long-term and of low magnitude and is therefore 
considered not significant. 

Note: Significant Residual Environmental Effect: A high probability of occurrence of a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot 
be technically or economically mitigated. 

 

Wildlife Habitat  
A quantitative approach was used to estimate the incremental cumulative effect of the Project and 
reasonably foreseeable developments on wildlife habitats in the Wildlife RSA. There is generally a lack of 
established quantitative thresholds, standards or guidelines relating to wildlife habitat alteration for most 
species. As a result, quantitative information on change in habitat is used qualitatively to inform the 
characterization of the magnitude of the Project’s incremental cumulative effect. Thresholds related to 
habitat disturbance are discussed relative to existing disturbance and contributions of the Project and 
foreseeable developments in the Wildlife RSA. Thresholds applicable to woodland caribou are discussed 
under Species at Risk in Section 7.2.9. 

The list of existing and foreseeable future developments outlined in Table 7.1A-C was reviewed to 
determine which projects and activities are likely to overlap spatially or temporally with the Project to have 
a cumulative interaction. Direct alteration of habitat (e.g., clearing, soil handling, grading, changes in water 
quality) and indirect alteration of habitat (e.g., noise, human activity) resulting from existing activities and 
reasonably foreseeable developments will act cumulatively with the Project to affect wildlife habitat. Existing 
activities that have resulted in disturbance of native vegetation in the Wildlife RSA include timber harvesting, 
transportation and utility development, and oil and gas exploration and development. 

Linear features (i.e., roads, trails, pipelines, powerlines, cutlines) contribute to habitat alteration both directly 
(e.g., through forest clearing and fragmentation) and indirectly through reduced habitat effectiveness 
(e.g., through avoidance or reduced use of habitats adjacent to linear features). The Project will interact 
with existing and foreseeable linear developments to affect wildlife habitat. 

Disturbance such as urban, rural, commercial and industrial facilities result in a loss of habitat for most or 
all wildlife species. Some disturbance types do not result in a complete loss of habitat, but alter habitat to 
early seral stages. Clearing for the Project, existing developments and foreseeable developments 
contribute to habitat alteration both directly (e.g., through forest clearing) and indirectly through reduced 
habitat effectiveness (e.g., through avoidance or reduced use of habitats adjacent to linear features). 
Habitat disturbance that results in regeneration of shrub dominated habitats may create improved habitat 
for moose and deer for up to 30 years post-disturbance (Fest-Bianchet et al. 2011, Rempel et al. 1997). 
However, when disturbance is associated with increased hunter access as a result of high road density, 
moose densities are demonstrated to decline (Rempel et al. 1997). The amount of disturbance to native 
vegetation as a result of the Project is reduced by locating approximately 21% of the Project Footprint within 
previously disturbed land (e.g., existing rights-of-way, roads, cutlines or other anthropogenic disturbance), 
using existing adjacent rights-of-way as temporary workspace, where practical, and routing parallel to 
existing linear disturbances (i.e., existing pipeline rights-of-way, roads, seismic line) for approximately 77% 
of the length of the pipeline route. 

Table 7.26 illustrates the current levels of disturbance attributed to various land use features and 
disturbances, as well as the anticipated disturbance attributed to the construction of the Project and 
reasonably foreseeable developments. Numbers are used in the table headings to clarify the values 
presented, where [1] is the area of existing disturbance in the Wildlife RSA, [2] is the incremental area of 
 

   
Page 7-49 

 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
disturbance attributed to the Project, and [3] is the incremental area of disturbance attributed to reasonably 
foreseeable developments. Overall cumulative disturbance in the Wildlife RSA is presented for Project 
conditions [1+2] and for cumulative conditions [1+2+3]. 

TABLE 7.26 
 

EXISTING AND FUTURE AREAL DISTURBANCE IN THE WILDLIFE RSA 

Land Use Feature 

Existing 
Conditions Project Conditions Cumulative Conditions 

Area of 
Disturbance

 (ha)1 

Change from 
Existing 

Conditions (ha)2 

Cumulative Area 
of Disturbance 

(ha)1+2 

Change from 
Project 

Conditions (ha
)3 

Change from 
Existing 

Conditions (ha)2+3 

Cumulative 
Area of 

Disturbance 
(ha)1+2+3 

Cities/Towns/Communities  5.1 0 5.1 0 0 5.1 
Airports/Airfields 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Primary Roads 183.7 0 183.7 150.5 ↑ 150.4 ↑ 334.2 
Quarries/Mines/Aggregates 89.1 0 89.1 3.4 ↓ 3.4 ↓ 85.8 
Commercial/Industrial Facilities 234.3 8.4 ↑ 242.7 29.0 ↑ 37.4 ↑ 271.7 
Secondary Roads 104.1 0 104.0 0.9 ↓ 0.9 ↓ 103.2 
Railways 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Well Sites  685.7 0 685.7 4.9 ↓ 4.9 ↓ 680.8 
Tertiary/Access Roads 325.6 0 325.8 0.4 ↓ 0.2 ↓ 325.4 
Buildings 0.1 0 0.08 0.01 ↓ 0.01↓ 0.07 
Recreational Sites 5.7 0 5.7 1.7 ↓ 1.7 ↓ 4.1 
Crop/Pasture 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Pipelines 1,447.5 95.2 ↑ 1,542.6 241.1 ↑ 336.3 ↑ 1,783.8 
Temporary Workspace 0 24.0 ↑ 24.0 0.2 ↓ 23.8 ↑ 23.8 
Transmission/Power Lines 119.5 0.1 ↓ 119.4 0.5 ↓ 0.7 ↓ 118.9 
Cutlines 1,969.7 6.1 ↓ 1,963.6 5.5 ↓ 11.6 ↓ 1,958.1 
Trails (Recreation) 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Cutblocks  8,845.4 6.0 ↓ 8,839.4 24.7 ↓ 30.7 ↓ 8,814.7 
Total  14,015.5 115.5 ↑ 14,131.0 378.5 ↑ 494.0 ↑ 14,509.4 
Total Area of Wildlife RSA: 177,987 ha 

Notes: - Numbers are used in the table headings to clarify the values presented, where (1) is the area of existing disturbance in the Wildlife RSA, (2) is 
the incremental area of disturbance attributed to the Project, and (3) is the incremental area of disturbance attributed to reasonably 
foreseeable future developments. Cumulative disturbance in the Wildlife RSA combined with existing development is presented for Project 
Conditions (1+2) and the cumulative disturbance in the Wildlife RSA for reasonably foreseeable developments combined with the Project and 
existing development (1+2+3). ↓ represents a decrease and ↑ represents an increase. 

 

The results of the quantitative analysis are summarized in Table 7.27. 

TABLE 7.27 
 

SUMMARY OF CUMULATIVE DISTURBANCE IN THE WILDLIFE RSA 

Disturbance Scenario Area (ha) 
Percent of 

Wildlife RSA 
Existing Disturbance in the Wildlife RSA 
Area of the Wildlife RSA 177,986.8 -- 
Area of Disturbance in the Wildlife RSA Attributed to Existing Activities1 14,015.5 7.9% 
Estimated Future Disturbance (Incremental) 
Area of Disturbance Attributed to the Project2 115.5 < 0.1% 
Area of Disturbance in the Wildlife RSA Attributed to Reasonably Foreseeable Developments3 378.5 0.2% 
Predicted Cumulative Disturbance (Total) 
Total Cumulative Disturbance (Existing1 + Project2 + Reasonably Foreseeable3) 14,509.4 8.1% 

Sources: Refer to Table 7.2 for data sources used for land use features  
Notes:  1 Calculations based on footprint disturbances provided in Table 7.27 are approximate.  

 
   

Page 7-50 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
 2 The estimated area of new disturbance resulting from the proposed compressor station, access road, pipeline right-of-way and temporary work 

space (i.e., excluding areas that overlap with existing disturbed areas). 
 3 The estimated area resulting from the construction of reasonably foreseeable developments within the Wildlife RSA for the Project 

(Tables 7.1A-C). 
 

A critical threshold for habitat loss may be defined as an abrupt, nonlinear change that occurs in some 
parameter (e.g., behaviour, abundance, community composition) across a small range of habitat loss (Swift 
and Hannon 2010). For example, the abundance of a species in a landscape declines more or less linearly 
as suitable habitat is lost, but may decline more rapidly once the amount of remaining habitat in the 
landscape falls below a certain proportion of the total landscape area. Critical threshold relationships 
between habitat loss and various ecological responses have been suggested in numerous simulation 
models and, to a lesser degree, empirical landscape-scale studies (Swift and Hannon 2010). Although 
highly variable, depending on species or landscape characteristics or other conditions, most of the observed 
critical thresholds for cumulative habitat loss occur between 10% and 50% of remaining habitat (i.e., when 
50% to 90% of suitable habitat has been lost) (Swift and Hannon 2010). The available scientific literature 
indicates that cumulative effects risk is highest when total habitat loss measured at the landscape (i.e., 
regional) scale is high (> 70%).  

Several studies suggest that cumulative effects risk and the influence of patch size and spatial arrangement 
is highest when habitat loss measured at the landscape (i.e., regional) scale is high (> 70%). For example, 
a modeling-based study by Flather and Bevers (2002) concluded that the amount of habitat accounted for 
> 96% of total variation in wildlife abundance compared to < 1% for arrangement of habitat, over a broad 
range of habitat types and arrangements. They also concluded that when total habitat loss was less than 
50-70%, the effects were simply habitat loss effects; with higher total loss, habitat arrangement effects 
became more important. These findings are consistent with conclusions from other meta-analyses and 
modeling studies (Andrén 1994, Fahrig 1997, Forman and Collinge 1997, Rich et al. 1994, Schmiegelow 
and Mönkkönen 2002, Swift and Hannon 2010). Andrén (1994) suggests that in landscapes with more than 
30% of suitable habitat remaining (i.e., less than 70% of suitable habitat is disturbed), the total area of 
suitable habitat is of greater importance than its spatial arrangement (e.g., patch size, isolation). As habitat 
loss increases, the remaining habitat becomes increasingly fragmented or the habitat patches are 
increasingly isolated, which may compound the effects of habitat loss (Swift and Hannon 2010). 

Existing disturbance has affected approximately 7.9% of the Wildlife RSA (Table 7.26). Regenerating 
cutblocks represent the largest portion of existing anthropogenic habitat disturbance in the Wildlife RSA 
(63.1%). The Project is estimated to increase disturbance in the Wildlife RSA by 115.6 ha, which will interact 
with existing disturbances to increase the overall disturbance by < 0.1%. The combined Project and 
foreseeable developments are predicted to contribute approximately 494.0 ha of disturbance within the 
Wildlife RSA, which will act cumulatively with existing disturbance to affect approximately 8.2% of the 
Wildlife RSA (an increase of 0.3% from existing conditions). As described above, critical thresholds of 
cumulative habitat loss appear to occur between 50% and 90% loss of functional habitat loss at the 
landscape (regional) scale for many wildlife species, and cumulative effects risk is highest above 70% 
regional habitat loss. The predicted proportion of disturbed habitat in the Wildlife RSA under cumulative 
conditions (8.2%) is well below the lower regional habitat loss threshold (50%) indicated in the available 
literature. 

In addition to quantifying changes in disturbance in the Wildlife RSA, a quantitative evaluation of habitat 
change was completed to inform the assessment of the magnitude of effects on wildlife and wildlife habitat, 
including species at risk (Section 7.2.9). Ten terrestrial habitat types were identified within the Wildlife RSA 
(Table 7.28) based on land cover classifications (LCCs) from Alberta Ground Cover Classification (AGCC) 
data (Natural Resources Canada 2009) and available disturbance data (see Table 7.2 for references). The 
AGCC data were derived from Landsat5 and Landsat7 ortho-images. Some error is inherent in spatial land 
cover and disturbance data. The dynamic nature of industrial development and land use in the RSA can 
affect the accuracy of these data. The AGCC data appear to be generally adequate to draw reasonable 
conclusions regarding habitat change for this cumulative effects assessment, with the exception of wetland 
habitats. Wetland field studies have verified wetland types along the route, consisting primarily of treed 
fens, treed mixedwood swamps and shrubby swamps (Appendix 6). These wetlands are classified variably 
by the AGCC land cover data as forest or treed wetlands. As a result, the information was not utilized to 
estimate predicted changes in habitat for rusty blackbird or western toad. Water data were derived using a 
 

   
Page 7-51 

 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
combination of the AGCC land cover data and hydrographic data (Natural Resources Canada 2007-2011, 
2009). Forestry cutblock and wildfire data were derived from provincial GIS datasets (ABMI 2010a,b, 
AESRD 2014i). The LCCs were modified to include known disturbances. These included wildfire (≤ 40 
years), regenerating cutblocks and other anthropogenic disturbance (i.e., roads, pipelines, transmission 
lines, cutlines, well sites, and oil and gas facilities) derived from the sources provided above. In areas where 
AGCC data overlapped disturbance data (i.e., cutblocks, wildfire or other anthropogenic disturbance), the 
latter was used to classify habitat type.  

Predicted changes in habitat types are summarized in Table 7.28. The Project and reasonably foreseeable 
developments will reduce natural habitats, regenerating burn areas, regenerating cutblocks, and increase 
anthropogenic disturbance. The Project and foreseeable developments will have greatest incremental 
reduction in regenerating burn areas (1,638.8 ha) and coniferous forest (225.6 ha). 

TABLE 7.28 
 

PREDICTED CHANGE IN HABITAT TYPES WITHIN THE WILDLIFE RSA 

Habitat Type 

Land Cover Class 
(Code)/Disturbance 

Type1 

Existing 
Conditions 

(ha) 2 

Project Conditions3 Cumulative Conditions4 
Project 

Conditions 
(ha) 

Incremental 
Change (ha) 

% 
Change 

Cumulative 
Conditions 

(ha) 

Incremental 
Change 

(ha) 
% 

Change 
Treed Wetland Wetland – treed (81) 28,081.3 28,073.4 7.9 ↓ < 0.1 ↓ 27,999.4 81.9 ↓ 0.3 ↓ 
Shrubby/Herbaceous 
Wetland 

Wetland – shrub (82) 
Wetland – herb (83) 

6,749.3 
 

6,744.7 4.6 ↓ < 0.1 ↓ 6,660.1 89.2 ↓ 1.3 ↓ 

Coniferous Forest Coniferous Dense 
(211) 
Coniferous Open 
(212) 

33,474.3 33,445.2 29.1 ↓ < 0.1 ↓ 33,248.7 225.6 ↓ 0.7 ↓ 

Deciduous and 
Mixedwood Forest 

Broadleaf Dense 
(221) 
Broadleaf Open (222) 
Mixedwood Dense 
(231) 

10,120.9 10,118.8 2.1 ↓ < 0.1 ↓ 10,089.3 31.6 ↓ 0.3 ↓ 

Regenerating Burn Forest fires 
(≤ 40 years) 

81,514.9 81,443.3 71.6 ↓ < 0.1 ↓ 79,876.1 1638.8 ↓ 2.0 ↓ 

Regenerating 
Cutblock 

Forestry Cutblock 8,845.4 8839.4 6.0 ↓ < 0.1 ↓ 8,841.7 30.7 ↓ 0.3 ↓ 

Gramminoid/ 
Herbaceous 

Herb (100) 
Grassland (110) 

145.0 145.0 0 0 144.7 0.3 ↓ 0.2 ↓ 

Shrub Shrub tall (51) 
Shrub low (52) 

114.8 114.8 0 0 110.0 4.8 ↓ 4.2 ↓ 

Anthropogenic 
Disturbance 

Rock/rubble (32) 
Exposed Land (33) 
Developed (34) 
Roads 
Pipelines 
Transmission lines 
Cutlines 
Well sites 
Oil and gas facilities 

5,311.6 5,432.9 121.3 ↑ 2.3 ↑ 7,415.5 2,103.9 ↑ 39.6 ↑ 

Water  Water (20) 3,362.8 3,362.8 0 0 3,362.8 0 0 
No Data Cloud (15) 

Shadow (16) 
266.5 266.5 0 0 265.5 1.0 ↓ 0.4 ↓ 

Total Area of Wildlife RSA: 177,986.8 ha 
Notes: Presented area (ha) values are rounded. Percent change was calculated using the full (i.e., not rounded) values. ↓ represents a decrease and ↑ 

represents an increase. 
 1 Land cover classification source: Natural Resources Canada 2009. Forest fire data source: AESRD 2014i. Forestry cutblock source: 

ABMI 2010a,b. 
 2  The area of existing disturbance in the Wildlife RSA, as delineated by available data sources (see Note 1). 
 3  The incremental area of disturbance attributed to the Project.  
 4  The incremental area of disturbance attributed to reasonably foreseeable developments.  
 
 

   
Page 7-52 

 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Routing of the Project to avoid new habitat fragmentation and utilizing existing disturbances to the extent 
practical are the primary mitigation measures to reduce the Project’s contribution to cumulative habitat loss. 
Additional Project-specific mitigation measures that can be practically adopted to reduce regional-scale 
habitat effects include using minimum disturbance construction techniques to facilitate natural regeneration, 
and reclaiming disturbed habitat (e.g., natural regeneration or seeding/planting native species at select 
locations). It is expected that other operators in the Wildlife RSA will implement similar industry standard 
mitigation. No mitigation measures beyond the Project-specific mitigation already proposed in Table 6.2.22 
are warranted to address incremental cumulative effects of the Project on wildlife habitat. 

With implementation of the proposed measures to reduce habitat disturbance and reclaim disturbed areas, 
the magnitude of the Project’s contribution cumulative effects is reduced to low. Regeneration of disturbed 
vegetation will begin during the operations phase of the Project (except for portions of the pipeline right-of-
way, which will generally be maintained with low vegetation for maintenance and operations) and will 
continue through the decommissioning or reclamation phase. Regeneration of vegetation for the 
compressor station will occur once the compressor station is abandoned and the forest habitat is reclaimed. 
Incremental cumulative effects are reversible in the long-term, once construction is completed and disturbed 
habitat is restored (Table 7.25, point [a]). 

Wildlife Movement 
The Project will potentially interact with existing and reasonably foreseeable developments and activities to 
have an incremental cumulative effect on the natural movement patterns of wildlife. Reasonably 
foreseeable developments that may act cumulatively with the Project in the Wildlife RSA to affect wildlife 
movement patterns are identified in Table 7.1A-C. The construction schedules of some of the other 
reasonably foreseeable developments may overlap with that of the Project and interact with the Project and 
existing and ongoing activities to incrementally increase cumulative effects on wildlife movement. The 
Project will contribute to cumulative changes in wildlife movement as a result of barriers during construction 
(e.g., windrows, strung pipe, open trench), avoidance (sensory disturbance), increasing forest gaps, and 
potentially attraction of wildlife to easy travel routes or forage. 

Existing and ongoing traffic and resource use (e.g., oil and gas), as well as construction phases of 
foreseeable developments, will interact with the Project to increase barriers or filters to movement, and alter 
movement patterns as wildlife avoid areas with high levels of noise and human activity or traffic. The pipeline 
route parallels existing disturbances and will therefore incrementally increase the width of the existing 
anthropogenic openings. Forest gaps, such as those created by utility corridors, can affect movements of 
forest birds (Bayne et al. 2005, Fleming and Schmiegelow 2002, Desrochers and Hannon 1997). Wider 
corridor widths have been found to have increased barrier effects on bird movements over narrower 
corridors (Desrochers and Hannon 1997), and parallel forest openings can cause a cumulative barrier effect 
at the landscape scale for some species (Belisle and St. Clair 2001). Residual forest patches, or detours, 
may facilitate bird movements across gaps (Desrochers and Hannon 1997, St. Clair et al. 1998). 

As outlined in Section Table 6.2.22, potential effects on wildlife movement patterns will be mitigated by: 
avoiding new habitat fragmentation by routing adjacent to existing disturbance; avoiding sensitive periods 
(e.g., migratory bird nesting period) or conducting nest sweeps; leaving gaps to allow wildlife movement 
across the construction right-of-way; working expeditiously to limit the duration of open trench at any given 
location; reclaiming the construction right-of-way. It is expected that other operators in the Wildlife RSA will 
employ similar best practices. No mitigation measures beyond the Project-specific mitigation already 
proposed in Table 6.2.22 are deemed to be warranted to address incremental cumulative effects of the 
Project on changes to wildlife movement patterns. 

The Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on wildlife movement patterns within the Wildlife RSA is 
anticipated to be low in magnitude and reversible in the long-term, once forest habitat regenerates over the 
Project Footprint (Table 7.25, point [b]). 

Wildlife Mortality Risk 
The Project will potentially interact with existing and reasonably foreseeable developments to have an 
incremental cumulative effect on wildlife mortality risk. Reasonably foreseeable developments that may act 
cumulatively with the Project in the Wildlife RSA to affect wildlife mortality risk are identified in Table 7.1A-C. 
 

   
Page 7-53 

 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Increased mortality risk may result from habitat disturbance, vehicle/wildlife collisions during construction, 
or changes in predator/prey dynamics. Limiting construction traffic volume, avoiding the migratory bird 
nesting and amphibian breeding periods, application of mitigation to control predator sight-lines (e.g., 
frequent bends in the route) and other mitigation outlined in Section 6.2.10 will reduce the incremental risk 
of wildlife mortality from the Project. Proponents of other reasonably foreseeable developments that could 
interact with the Project to increase wildlife mortality risk are expected to implement similar measures in 
accordance with industry best practices. No mitigation measures beyond the Project-specific mitigation 
already proposed in Table 6.2.22 are deemed to be warranted to address cumulative increases in wildlife 
mortality risk.  

The Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on wildlife mortality risk within the Wildlife RSA is considered 
to be of low magnitude and reversible in the long-term once forest habitat regenerates over the Project 
Footprint. (Table 7.25, point [c]). 

Combined Cumulative Effects on Wildlife and Wildlife Habitat 
The Project will contribute to cumulative effects on wildlife habitat, movement and mortality risk in the 
Wildlife RSA. With implementation of the proposed mitigation, including routing adjacent to existing 
disturbance, reducing the Project Footprint to the extent practical, minimum disturbance construction 
measures that facilitate natural regeneration, and avoiding sensitive periods (e.g., migratory bird nesting 
period or conducting nest sweeps), the combined Project effects are expected to have a small contribution 
to cumulative effects at the regional scale. The magnitude of the combined incremental cumulative effects 
of the Project will be reduced with the implementation of mitigation measures (Table 6.2.22), and are 
reversible in the long-term once forest habitat regenerates. The combined Project effects are expected to 
be of low magnitude with respect to the Project’s contribution to cumulative effects at the regional scale 
(Table 7.25, point [d]). 

7.2.8.3 Summary 

As identified in Table 7.25, there are no situations where there is a high probability of occurrence of a 
permanent or long-term cumulative effect of high magnitude that cannot be technically or economically 
mitigated. Consequently, the Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on wildlife and wildlife habitat within 
the Wildlife RSA will not be significant. 

7.2.9 Species at Risk 

As identified in Section 6.2.11, there are no potential and likely residual environmental effects associated 
with the construction and operation of the Project on fish species at risk or plant species at risk. 
Consequently, a cumulative effects assessment was not conducted for fish or plant species at risk.  

7.2.9.1 Potential Cumulative Effects 

The potential and likely residual environmental effects associated with the construction and operation of 
the Project on wildlife species at risk were identified in Section 6.2.11 and are listed in Table 7.29 along 
with the identification of existing activities and reasonably foreseeable developments acting in combination 
with the Project.  

  

 
   

Page 7-54 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
TABLE 7.29 

 
POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF THE PROJECT ON  

SPECIES AT RISK CONSIDERED FOR THE CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ASSESSMENT 

Potential Residual 
Effects 

Spatial 
Boundary Component 

Temporal 
Boundary 

Potential 
Cumulative 

Effect 

Existing Activities/Reasonably Foreseeable 
Developments with Residual Effects Acting in 

Combination with the Project 
1. Combined Project 

effects on 
woodland caribou 
resulting from 
changes in 
habitat, 
movement and 
mortality risk 

Caribou 
RSA 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

Past 
development to 
operation  

Incremental 
cumulative 
effects on 
woodland 
caribou. 

• Existing activities/disturbance: timber 
harvesting, transmission development, 
transportation development, oil and gas 
exploration and development, and fire. 

• Reasonably foreseeable developments within 
the RSA are listed in Table 7.1A-C. 

• Project-related activities that could interact to 
affect wildlife habitat include Project 
construction (including but not limited to 
clearing, soil handling, grading, access road 
and compressor station construction, pipeline 
installation, waste storage and disposal, traffic, 
reclamation) and operation (including but not 
limited to periodic monitoring and maintenance 
activities, traffic). 

2. Combined Project 
effects on 
wolverine 
resulting from 
changes in 
habitat, 
movement and 
mortality risk 

Wildlife 
RSA 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

Past 
development to 
operation  

Incremental 
cumulative 
effects on 
wolverine. 

• Existing activities/disturbance: timber 
harvesting, transmission development, 
transportation development, oil and gas 
exploration and development, and fire. 

• Reasonably foreseeable developments within 
the RSA are listed in Table 7.1A-C. 

• Project-related activities that could interact to 
affect wildlife habitat include Project 
construction (including but not limited to 
clearing, soil handling, grading, access road 
and compressor station construction, pipeline 
installation, waste storage and disposal, traffic, 
reclamation) and operation (including but not 
limited to periodic monitoring and maintenance 
activities, traffic). 

3. Combined Project 
effects on bats 
resulting from 
changes in 
habitat, 
movement and 
mortality risk  

Wildlife 
RSA 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

Past 
development to 
operation 

Incremental 
cumulative 
effects on bats. 

• Existing activities/disturbance: timber 
harvesting, transmission development, 
transportation development, oil and gas 
exploration and development, and fire. 

• Reasonably foreseeable developments within 
the RSA are listed in Table 7.1A-C. 

• Project-related activities that could interact to 
affect wildlife habitat include Project 
construction (including but not limited to 
clearing, soil handling, grading, access road 
and compressor station construction, pipeline 
installation, waste storage and disposal, traffic, 
reclamation) and operation (including but not 
limited to periodic monitoring and maintenance 
activities, traffic). 

 

 
   

Page 7-55 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 7.29  Cont'd 

Potential Residual 
Effects 

Spatial 
Boundary Component 

Temporal 
Boundary 

Potential 
Cumulative 

Effect 

Existing Activities/Reasonably Foreseeable 
Developments with Residual Effects Acting in 

Combination with the Project 
4. Combined Project 

effects on forest 
birds resulting 
from changes in 
habitat, 
movement and 
mortality risk 

Wildlife 
RSA 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

Past 
development to 
operation  

Incremental 
cumulative 
effects on forest 
birds. 

• Existing activities/disturbance: timber 
harvesting, transmission development, 
transportation development, oil and gas 
exploration and development, and fire. 

• Reasonably foreseeable developments within 
the RSA are listed in Table 7.1A-C. 

• Project-related activities that could interact to 
affect wildlife habitat include Project 
construction (including but not limited to 
clearing, soil handling, grading, access road 
and compressor station construction, pipeline 
installation, waste storage and disposal, traffic, 
reclamation) and operation (including but not 
limited to periodic monitoring and maintenance 
activities, traffic). 

5. Combined Project 
effects on olive-
sided flycatcher 
resulting from 
changes in 
habitat, 
movement and 
mortality risk 

Wildlife 
RSA 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

Past 
development to 
operation  

Incremental 
cumulative 
effects on olive-
sided flycatcher. 

• Existing activities/disturbance: timber 
harvesting, transmission development, 
transportation development, oil and gas 
exploration and development, and fire 

• Reasonably foreseeable developments within 
the RSA are listed in Table 7.1A-C. 

• Project-related activities that could interact to 
affect wildlife habitat include Project 
construction (including but not limited to 
clearing, soil handling, grading, access road 
and compressor station construction, pipeline 
installation, waste storage and disposal, traffic, 
reclamation) and operation (including but not 
limited to periodic monitoring and maintenance 
activities, traffic). 

6. Combined Project 
effects on rusty 
blackbird resulting 
from changes in 
habitat, 
movement and 
mortality risk 

Wildlife 
RSA 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

Past 
development to 
operation  

Incremental 
cumulative 
effects on rusty 
blackbird. 

• Existing activities/disturbance: timber 
harvesting, transmission development, 
transportation development, oil and gas 
exploration and development, and fire.  

• Reasonably foreseeable developments within 
the RSA are listed in Table 7.1A-C. 

• Project-related activities that could interact to 
affect wildlife habitat include Project 
construction (including but not limited to 
clearing, soil handling, grading, pipeline 
installation, waste storage and disposal, traffic, 
reclamation) and operation (including but not 
limited to periodic monitoring and maintenance 
activities, traffic). 

7. Combined Project 
effects on western 
toad resulting 
from changes in 
habitat, 
movement and 
mortality risk 

Wildlife 
RSA 

Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

Past 
development to 
operation  

Incremental 
cumulative 
effects on 
western toad. 

• Existing activities/disturbance: timber 
harvesting, transmission development, 
transportation development, oil and gas 
exploration and development, and fire 

• Reasonably foreseeable developments within 
the RSA are listed in Table 7.1A-C. 

• Project-related activities that could interact to 
affect wildlife habitat include Project 
construction (including but not limited to 
clearing, soil handling, grading, access road 
and compressor station construction, pipeline 
installation, waste storage and disposal, traffic, 
reclamation) and operation (including but not 
limited to periodic monitoring and maintenance 
activities, traffic). 

 

 
   

Page 7-56 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
7.2.9.2 Significance Evaluation of Potential Cumulative Effects 

The qualitative assessment method described in Section 6.2.10 was adopted for the characterization and 
significance determination of cumulative adverse effects on wildlife species at risk. All assessment criteria 
were considered when determining the significance of each cumulative adverse effect. The most influential 
assessment criteria for wildlife species at risk are magnitude and reversibility. Quantitative metrics were 
completed to inform the characterization of the magnitude of residual effects. 

Table 7.30 summarizes the characterization and significance determination of potential cumulative residual 
environmental effects of the construction and operation of the proposed pipeline on wildlife species at risk. 

TABLE 7.30 
 

SIGNIFICANCE EVALUATION OF THE PROJECT’S  
CONTRIBUTION TO CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ON SPECIES AT RISK 

Potential Incremental 
Cumulative Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 

a. Project contribution to 
cumulative effects on 
woodland caribou 

Impact Balance: Negative Construction and operation of the Project will contribute to adverse cumulative effects 
on woodland caribou as a result of combined changes in habitat, movement and 
mortality risk. 

Spatial Boundary: Caribou RSA The Project may interact with existing and reasonably foreseeable development within 
the Caribou RSA to have cumulative effects on woodland caribou. 

Duration: Short-Term The events causing potential cumulative effects are construction and operational 
activities that will be completed within any one year during operations (e.g., monitoring, 
vegetation management and site-specific maintenance) that will be completed within 
any one year during operations. 

Frequency: Periodic The events causing potential cumulative effects (i.e., clearing of the Project Footprint, 
traffic and activity) will occur during construction and intermittently during operations for 
monitoring, vegetation control and maintenance. 

Reversibility: Long-Term Revegetation of disturbed areas will begin during the operations phase. Establishment 
of herbaceous and shrub vegetation will occur in a much shorter timeframe than 
forested habitats, which will take decades to regenerate. The Project’s contribution to 
cumulative effects on woodland caribou is therefore reversible in the long-term, once 
forest habitat regenerates over the Project Footprint. 

Magnitude: High The habitat threshold that provides a measureable probability for a local caribou 
population to be self-sustaining is considered to be 65% undisturbed habitat in a range, 
and Environment Canada (2012) reports that the current non-overlapping habitat 
disturbance of the ESAR caribou range as 81%, which is greater than the threshold of 
35% disturbed habitat in a range. As such, the current cumulative effects on caribou in 
the ESAR caribou range are considered to be of high magnitude. The implementation 
of the planned mitigation, including employing an “early in/early out” approach, access 
control, line-of-sight measures, using construction techniques that restrict grubbing and 
a combination of natural recovery and accelerated methods of reclamation, and 
implementation of additional site-specific mitigation and restoration measures in the 
Caribou Mitigation Plan developed in consultation with AESRD, is expected to reduce 
the Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on woodland caribou. The Project will 
cause an increase in functional habitat disturbance of <0.1% in the Algar Caribou Herd 
and no change in functional disturbance for the Agnes caribou range or the Egg-Pony 
caribou range.  Given that the current cumulative effects on caribou in the ESAR 
caribou range are considered to be of high magnitude, any additional disturbance is, 
therefore, also considered to be of high magnitude. As a result, the magnitude of the 
Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on caribou is considered high, even though 
the Project contribution is small. 

Probability: High The Project will interact with existing and reasonably foreseeable developments to 
affect woodland caribou. 

Confidence: High The assessment is based on a good understanding of cause-effect relationships and 
data pertinent to the Project area. 

Significance: Significant  The Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on woodland caribou within the Caribou 
RSA is of high magnitude, reversible in the long-term and has a high probability of 
occurrence; therefore, the Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on woodland 
caribou is considered to be significant. 

 

 
   

Page 7-57 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 7.30  Cont’d 

Potential Incremental 
Cumulative Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 

b.  Project contribution to 
cumulative effects on 
wolverine 

Impact Balance: Negative Construction and operation of the Project will contribute to adverse cumulative effects 
on wolverine as a result of changes in habitat, movement and mortality risk. 

Spatial Boundary: Wildlife RSA The Project may interact with existing and reasonably foreseeable development within 
the Wildlife RSA to have cumulative effects on wolverine. 

Duration: Short-Term The events causing potential cumulative effects are construction and operational 
activities (e.g., monitoring, vegetation management and site-specific maintenance) that 
will be completed within any one year during operations. 

Frequency: Periodic The events causing potential cumulative effects (i.e., clearing of the Project Footprint, 
traffic and activity) will occur during construction and intermittently during operations for 
monitoring, vegetation control and maintenance. 

Reversibility: Long-Term Revegetation of disturbed vegetation will begin during the operations phase. 
Establishment of herbaceous and shrub vegetation will occur in a much shorter 
timeframe than forested habitats, which will take decades to regenerate. The Project’s 
contribution to cumulative effects on wolverine is therefore reversible in the long-term, 
once forest habitat regenerates over the Project Footprint. 

Magnitude: Low With the implementation of the recommended mitigation, the Project’s contribution to 
cumulative effects on wolverine within the Wildlife RSA is concluded to be low in 
magnitude. 

Probability: High The Project will interact with existing and reasonably foreseeable developments to 
affect wolverine. 

Confidence: Moderate The assessment is based on a good understanding of cause-effect relationships and 
data from outside the Project area. 

Significance: Not significant  The Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on wolverine within the Wildlife RSA is 
reversible in the long-term and of low magnitude and is therefore considered not 
significant. 

c.  Project contribution to 
cumulative effects on 
bats 

Impact Balance: Negative Construction and operation of the Project will contribute to adverse cumulative effects 
on bats as a result of changes in habitat, movement and mortality risk. 

Spatial Boundary: Wildlife RSA The Project may interact with existing and reasonably foreseeable development within 
the Wildlife RSA to have cumulative effects on bats. 

Duration: Short-Term The events causing potential cumulative effects are construction and operational 
activities (e.g., monitoring, vegetation management and site-specific maintenance) that 
will be completed within any one year during operations. 

Frequency: Periodic The events causing potential cumulative effects (i.e., clearing of the Project Footprint, 
traffic and activity) will occur during construction and intermittently during operations for 
monitoring, vegetation control and maintenance. 

Reversibility: Long-Term Revegetation of disturbed vegetation will begin during the operations phase. 
Establishment of herbaceous and shrub vegetation will occur in a much shorter 
timeframe than forested habitats, which will take decades to regenerate. The Project’s 
contribution to cumulative effects on bats is therefore reversible in the long-term, once 
forest habitat regenerates over the Project Footprint. 

Magnitude: Low With the implementation of the recommended mitigation, the Project’s contribution to 
cumulative effects on bats within the Wildlife RSA is concluded to be low in magnitude. 

Probability: High The Project will interact with existing and reasonably foreseeable developments to 
affect bats. 

Confidence: Moderate The assessment is based on a reasonable understanding of cause-effect relationships 
and data from outside the Project area. 

Significance: Not significant  The Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on bats within the Wildlife RSA is 
reversible in the long-term and of low magnitude and is therefore considered not 
significant. 

d.  Project contribution to 
cumulative effects on 
forest birds 

Impact Balance: Negative Construction and operation of the Project will contribute to adverse cumulative effects 
on forest birds as a result of combined changes in habitat, movement and mortality risk. 

Spatial Boundary: Wildlife RSA The Project may interact with existing and reasonably foreseeable development within 
the Wildlife RSA to have cumulative effects on forest birds. 

Duration: Short-Term The events causing potential cumulative effects are construction and operational 
activities (e.g., monitoring, vegetation management and site-specific maintenance) that 
will be completed within any one year during operations. 

Frequency: Periodic The events causing potential cumulative effects (i.e., clearing of the Project Footprint, 
traffic activity) will occur during construction and intermittently during operations for 
monitoring, vegetation control and maintenance. 

 

 
   

Page 7-58 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 7.30  Cont’d 

Potential Incremental 
Cumulative Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 

d.  Project contribution to 
cumulative effects on 
forest birds (cont’d) 

Reversibility: Long-Term Revegetation of disturbed vegetation will begin during the operations phase. 
Establishment of herbaceous and shrub vegetation will occur in a much shorter 
timeframe than forested habitats, which will take decades to regenerate. The Project’s 
contribution to cumulative effects on forest birds is therefore reversible in the long-term, 
once forest habitat regenerates over the Project Footprint. 

Magnitude: Low With the implementation of the recommended mitigation, the Project’s contribution to 
cumulative effects on forest birds within the Wildlife RSA is concluded to be low in 
magnitude. 

Probability: High The Project will interact with existing and reasonably foreseeable developments to 
affect forest birds. 

Confidence: High The assessment is based on a good understanding of cause-effect relationships and 
data pertinent to the Project area. 

Significance: Not significant  The Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on forest birds within the Wildlife RSA is 
reversible in the long-term and of low magnitude and is therefore considered not 
significant. 

e. Project contribution to 
cumulative effects on 
olive-sided flycatcher  

Impact Balance: Negative Construction and operation of the Project will contribute to adverse cumulative effects 
on olive-sided flycatcher as a result of combined changes in habitat, movement and 
mortality risk. 

Spatial Boundary: Wildlife RSA The Project may interact with existing and reasonably foreseeable development within 
the Wildlife RSA to have cumulative effects on olive-sided flycatcher. 

Duration: Short-Term The events causing potential cumulative effects are construction and operational 
activities (e.g., monitoring, vegetation management and site-specific maintenance) that 
will be completed within any one year during operations. 

Frequency: Periodic The events causing potential cumulative effects (i.e., clearing of the Project Footprint, 
traffic and activity) will occur during construction and intermittently during operations for 
monitoring, vegetation control and maintenance. 

Reversibility: Long-Term Revegetation of disturbed vegetation will begin during the operations phase. 
Establishment of herbaceous and shrub vegetation will occur in a much shorter 
timeframe than forested habitats, which will take decades to regenerate. The Project’s 
contribution to cumulative effects on olive-sided flycatcher is therefore reversible in the 
long-term, once forest habitat regenerates over the Project Footprint. 

Magnitude: Low With the implementation of the recommended mitigation, the Project’s contribution to 
cumulative effects on olive-sided flycatcher within the Wildlife RSA is concluded to be 
low in magnitude. 

Probability: High The Project will interact with existing and reasonably foreseeable developments to 
affect olive-sided flycatcher. 

Confidence: High The assessment is based on a good understanding of cause-effect relationships and 
data pertinent to the Project area. 

Significance: Not significant  The Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on olive-sided flycatcher within the 
Wildlife RSA is reversible in the long-term and of low magnitude and is therefore 
considered not significant. 

f Project contribution to 
cumulative effects on 
rusty blackbird 

Impact Balance: Negative Construction and operation of the Project will contribute to adverse cumulative effects 
on rusty blackbird as a result of combined changes in habitat, movement and mortality 
risk. 

Spatial Boundary: Wildlife RSA The Project may interact with existing and reasonably foreseeable development within 
the Wildlife RSA to have cumulative effects on rusty blackbird. 

Duration: Short-Term The events causing potential cumulative effects are construction and operational 
activities (e.g., monitoring, vegetation management and site-specific maintenance) that 
will be completed within any one year during operations. 

Frequency: Periodic The events causing potential cumulative effects (i.e., clearing of the Project Footprint, 
traffic and activity) will occur during construction and intermittently during operations for 
monitoring, vegetation control and maintenance. 

Reversibility: Long-Term Revegetation of disturbed riparian and wetland vegetation will begin during the 
operations phase. Establishment of herbaceous and shrub wetland vegetation will 
occur in a much shorter timeframe than forested riparian and treed wetland habitats, 
which will take decades to regenerate. The Project’s contribution to cumulative effects 
on wetland birds is therefore reversible in the long-term, once riparian and treed 
wetland vegetation regenerates over the Project Footprint. 

Magnitude: Low With the implementation of the recommended mitigation, the Project’s contribution to 
cumulative effects on rusty blackbird within the Wildlife RSA is concluded to be low in 
magnitude. 

 
   

Page 7-59 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 7.30  Cont’d 

Potential Incremental 
Cumulative Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 

f Project contribution to 
cumulative effects on 
rusty blackbird (cont’d) 

Probability: High The Project will interact with existing and reasonably foreseeable developments to 
affect rusty blackbird. 

Confidence: High The assessment is based on a good understanding of cause-effect relationships and 
data pertinent to the Project area. 

Significance: Not significant  The Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on rusty blackbird within the Wildlife 
RSA is reversible in the long-term and of low magnitude and is therefore considered not 
significant. 

g.  Project contribution to 
cumulative effects on 
western toad 

Impact Balance: Negative Construction and operation of the Project will contribute to adverse cumulative effects 
on western toad as a result of combined changes in habitat, movement and mortality 
risk. 

Spatial Boundary: Wildlife RSA The Project may interact with existing and reasonably foreseeable development within 
the Wildlife RSA to have cumulative effects on western toad. 

Duration: Short-Term The events causing potential cumulative effects are construction and operational 
activities (e.g., monitoring, vegetation management and site-specific maintenance). 

Frequency: Periodic The events causing potential cumulative effects (i.e., clearing of the Project Footprint, 
traffic and activity) will occur during construction and intermittently during operations for 
monitoring, vegetation control and maintenance. 

Reversibility: Long-Term Revegetation of disturbed riparian and wetland vegetation will begin during the 
operations phase. Establishment of herbaceous and shrub wetland vegetation will 
occur in a much shorter timeframe than forested riparian and treed wetland habitats, 
which will take decades to regenerate. The Project’s contribution to cumulative effects 
on western toad is therefore reversible in the long-term, once riparian and wetland 
vegetation regenerates over the Project Footprint. 

Magnitude: Low With the implementation of the recommended mitigation, the Project’s contribution to 
cumulative effects on western toad within the Wildlife RSA is concluded to be low in 
magnitude. 

Probability: High The Project will interact with existing and reasonably foreseeable developments to 
affect western toad. 

Confidence: Low The assessment is based on a good understanding of cause-effect relationships and 
data pertinent to the Project area; however, interaction of the Project with amphibians 
during terrestrial life stages is uncertain. 

Significance: Not significant  The Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on western toad within the Wildlife RSA 
is reversible in the long-term and of low magnitude and is therefore considered not 
significant. 

Note: Significant Residual Environmental Effect: A high probability of occurrence of a permanent or long-term residual effect of high magnitude that cannot 
be technically or economically mitigated. 

 

Cumulative Effects on Woodland Caribou 
The Project will act cumulatively with existing activities and reasonably foreseeable developments, such as 
oil and gas exploration and development, timber harvesting, transportation development, transmission 
development and traffic, to have incremental cumulative effects on woodland caribou. Cumulative effects 
on woodland caribou may include changes in habitat, movement and mortality risk. Reasonably foreseeable 
developments that may act cumulatively with the Project in the Caribou RSA to affect woodland caribou are 
identified in Table 7.1A-C. The construction schedules of the other reasonably foreseeable developments 
may overlap with that of the Project and may interact with the Project and existing activities to incrementally 
increase cumulative effects on woodland caribou.  

As discussed in Section 6.2.11.4, the habitat threshold that provides a measureable probability for a local 
caribou population to be self-sustaining is considered to be 65% undisturbed habitat within the range 
(Environment Canada 2012). Environment Canada (2012) reports the current non-overlapping habitat 
disturbance of the ESAR caribou range as 81% (77% anthropogenic, 26% fire; note that anthropogenic and 
fire disturbances that overlap are not counted twice in the total), which is greater than the Environment 
Canada threshold of 35% disturbed habitat in a range. The ESAR caribou range has an estimated 
population size of 90-150 individuals (Environment Canada 2012). The annual population growth rates for 
the Alberta ESAR caribou population indicates that the population is in rapid decline (ASRD and ACA 2010). 

 
   

Page 7-60 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
As such, the current cumulative effects on caribou in the ESAR caribou range are considered to be of high 
magnitude. 

Within the Algar caribou range, the Project will cause an incremental increase of 54.1 ha of direct 
anthropogenic disturbance (an increase of 0.4% relative to the amount of existing anthropogenic 
disturbance, which is 13,982 ha) and the reasonably foreseeable developments will cause an incremental 
increase of 250.5 ha of direct anthropogenic disturbance (an increase of 1.8% relative to the amount of 
existing anthropogenic disturbance). Within the Egg-Pony caribou range, the Project will cause an 
incremental increase of 25.3 ha of direct anthropogenic disturbance (an increase of 0.1% relative to the 
amount of existing anthropogenic disturbance, which is 23,782 ha), and the reasonably foreseeable 
developments will cause an incremental increase of 531.7 ha of direct anthropogenic disturbance (an 
increase of 2.2% relative to the amount of existing anthropogenic disturbance). 

Functional habitat disturbance incorporates the direct disturbance (anthropogenic and fire < 40 years) and 
the potential zone of influence (reduced habitat effectiveness) within 500 m of anthropogenic disturbance. 
Undisturbed habitat is defined as the habitat remaining outside of the functional habitat disturbance. All 
available disturbance data was used in this analysis (see Table 7.2 for data sources), including seismic 
lines. Results indicate the Project will cause an increase in functional habitat disturbance of < 0.1% in the 
Algar caribou range, but no change in functional disturbance for the Agnes caribou range or the Egg-Pony 
caribou range (Table 7.31).  

A summary of the direct and functional habitat disturbance effects of the Project is provided below. 

• The Project will cause an incremental increase of 79.4 ha of direct anthropogenic disturbance in the 
ESAR caribou range. Given that the ESAR caribou range is 1,315,980 ha in area, (Environment Canada 
2012), the Project will incrementally increase the amount of disturbed habitat [direct disturbance] in the 
ESAR caribou range by < 0.1%. 

• Of this 79.4 ha, 54.1 ha is in the range of the Algar herd, which is 330,840 ha in area, of which 81%, or 
268,402 ha, is already subject to functional disturbance. The Project will increase this functional 
disturbance by < 0.1% relative to existing conditions. 

• The Project will result in 25.3 ha of direct anthropogenic disturbance within the Egg-Pony caribou range, 
which is 374,710 ha in area, and of which 97%, or 364,180 ha, is already subject to functional 
disturbance. The Project will not result in an increase in functional disturbance within the Egg-Pony 
caribou range. 

• The Project will not result in a direct anthropogenic disturbance within the Agnes caribou range, nor will 
it result in a change in functional disturbance within this caribou range (Table 7.31). 

Overall, the cumulative contribution of the Project and foreseeable developments will cause an increase of 
functional habitat disturbance of 0.2% in the Agnes caribou range and < 0.1% in the Algar and Egg-Pony 
caribou ranges. When the area of undisturbed habitat is evaluated, the Project contributes < 0.1% reduction 
from existing conditions in the Algar caribou range, but no change in undisturbed habitat in the Agnes or 
Egg-Pony caribou ranges. The cumulative interaction of the Project and reasonably foreseeable 
developments (cumulative conditions) will cause a reduction in undisturbed habitat from existing conditions 
of 1.0% in the Agnes caribou range, 0.1% in the Algar caribou range and 0.3% in the Egg-Pony caribou 
range Table 7.31). 

  

 
   

Page 7-61 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
TABLE 7.31 

 
PREDICTED CHANGE IN HABITAT DISTURBANCE IN THE CARIBOU RSA 

Disturbance 

Total 
Area 
(ha)1 

Existing 
Conditions 

(ha)  
[1] 

Project Conditions Cumulative Conditions 

Project (ha) 
[1+2] 

Incremental 
Change (ha) 

[2] % Change 

Cumulative 
(ha)  

[1+2+3] 

Incremental 
Change (ha) 

[3] % Change 
Agnes caribou herd 
Direct 
Anthropogenic 
Disturbance  

47,071 5,644.3 5,644.3 0 0 5,679.4 35.1 ↑ 0.6 ↑ 

Functional 
Disturbance 2 

40,475.7 40,475.7 0 0 40,542.7 67.0 ↑ 0.2 ↑ 

Undisturbed 3 6,594.8 6,594.8 0 0 6,527.8 67.0 ↓ 1.0 ↓ 
Algar caribou herd 
Direct 
Anthropogenic 
Disturbance  

330,840 13,981.8 14,035.9 54.1 ↑ 0.4 ↑ 14,286.4 250.5 ↑ 1.8 ↑ 

Functional 
Disturbance 2 

268,402.5 268,408.0 5.5 ↑ < 0.1 ↑ 268,492.7 84.7 ↑ < 0.1 ↑ 

Undisturbed 3 62,437.3 62,431.8 5.5 ↓ < 0.1 ↓ 62,347.1 84.7 ↓ 0.1↓ 
Egg-Pony caribou herd 
Direct 
Anthropogenic 
Disturbance  

374,710 23,781.6 23,806.9 25.3 ↑ 0.1 ↑ 24,338.6 531.7 ↑ 2.2 ↑ 

Functional 
Disturbance 2 

364,180.2 364,180.2 0 0 364,206.8 26.6 ↑ , < 0.1 ↑ 

Undisturbed 3 10,530.2 10,530.2 0 0 10,503.6 26.6 ↓ 0.3 ↓ 
 

Notes:  1 Total area includes disturbed and undisturbed habitat. 
 2 Functional habitat disturbance incorporates the direct disturbance (anthropogenic and fire <40 years) and the potential zone of influence (reduced 

habitat effectiveness) within 500 m of anthropogenic disturbance.  
 3 Undisturbed habitat is defined as the habitat remaining outside of the functional habitat disturbance.  
 Presented area (ha) values are rounded. Incremental and percent change was calculated using the full (i.e., not rounded) values and are relative 

to existing conditions. 
 ↓ represents a decrease and ↑ represents an increase. 
 [1] is the area of existing disturbance in the Caribou RSA. 
 [2] is the incremental area of disturbance attributed to the Project. 
 [3] is the incremental area of disturbance attributed to reasonably foreseeable developments. 
 

As outlined in Section 6.2.11, potential effects on woodland caribou will be mitigated by: paralleling existing 
pipeline rights-of-way,  roads, and seismic lines for 90% of the pipeline length within caribou range; 
employing an “early in/early out” approach during construction of the pipeline (i.e., initiate activities as early 
as possible and work expeditiously to limit late winter activities) in order to avoid the sensitive late 
winter/calving period recommended by AESRD of February 15 to July 15; implementing access control 
(e.g., rollback) and line-of-sight measures (e.g., vegetation barriers); using reclamation techniques that 
accelerate vegetation regeneration (e.g., mounding, planting conifer seedlings, willow/shrub staking in 
riparian areas); and preparing a Caribou Mitigation Plan  for the Project. It is expected that other operators 
in the Wildlife RSA will employ similar practices.  

The Project will cause an increase in functional habitat disturbance of < 0.1% in the Algar Caribou Herd 
and no change in functional disturbance for the Agnes caribou range or the Egg-Pony caribou range.  As 
previously noted, the existing cumulative effect on woodland caribou within the ESAR caribou range is of 
high magnitude. Any additional disturbance is, therefore, also considered to be of high magnitude. 
Therefore, the magnitude of the Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on caribou is considered high, 
even though the Project contribution is small. The implementation of site-specific mitigation and restoration 
measures reflected in a Caribou Mitigation Plan developed in consultation with AESRD is expected to 
reduce the incremental Project contribution to cumulative effects on woodland caribou. The Project’s 

 
   

Page 7-62 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
contribution to cumulative effects are reversible in the long-term, once forest habitat regenerates over the 
Project Footprint (Table 7.30, point [a]). 

Cumulative Effects on Wolverine 
The Project is likely to interact with existing and reasonably foreseeable developments (Table 7.1A-C) to 
have an incremental cumulative effect on habitat (clearing), movement (human disturbance) and mortality 
risk of wolverine (new linear corridors create new access). Although forest clearing does not necessarily 
negatively affect wolverine habitat, human presence and activities can alter behaviour patterns 
(e.g., denning, travel and foraging). Indirect effects on wolverine prey bases (e.g., ungulate populations) 
resulting from human developments are also associated with effects to wolverine populations 
(COSEWIC 2003). Resilience of wolverine populations to external pressures may be limited by their low 
densities, large home ranges and low reproductive capacities (Lofroth and Ott 2007).  

Construction of the Project will cause an incremental disturbance of habitat, which will increase the 
disturbed portion of the Wildlife RSA by <0.1%. When estimated disturbances from reasonably foreseeable 
developments in the Wildlife RSA is considered, the total predicted cumulative habitat disturbance is an 
estimated 0.3% over existing levels in the Wildlife RSA (Table 7.27). 

The pipeline route will parallel existing linear corridors for approximately 77% of the total pipeline length. 
Approximately 6.9 km of new linear corridor will result from the Project, which may act cumulatively with 
existing activities and reasonably foreseeable developments to increase human access. Note that the new 
linear corridor resulting from the Project is a result of minor deviations from the existing linear corridors to 
facilitate crossing watercourses or avoidance of existing infrastructure. With increased access, there is 
potential for wolverine populations to experience increased risk of mortality as a result of increased trapping 
pressure.  

The magnitude of the Project's incremental cumulative residual effects on wolverine is reduced to low with 
the application of mitigation measures including: reducing habitat disturbance and new access by routing 
the pipelines adjacent to existing disturbances and utilizing shared workspace to the extent practical; 
reducing habitat disturbance (e.g., HDD of the House River; reducing watercourse crossings, muskeg and 
other wet areas), and promoting revegetation of natural species (i.e., natural recovery); and implementing 
access control measures such as rollback (Table 6.2.24). It is expected that other operators in the Wildlife 
RSA will employ similar best practices. No mitigation measures beyond the Project-specific mitigation 
already proposed in Section 6.2.11 are deemed to be warranted to address incremental cumulative effects 
of the Project on wolverine. 

With the implementation of the recommended mitigation, the Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on 
wolverine within the Wildlife RSA is anticipated to be low in magnitude and reversible in the long-term, once 
forest habitat regenerates over the Project Footprint after the compressor station is no longer operational 
(Table 7.30, point [b]).   

Cumulative Effects on Bats 
The Project is likely to interact with existing and reasonably foreseeable developments to have an 
incremental cumulative effect on tree roosting habitat, movement and mortality risk for bats. Using available 
land cover and disturbance data, the Project in combination with other reasonably foreseeable 
developments will affect approximately 31.6 ha of deciduous and mixedwood forest and 225.6 ha of 
coniferous forest habitat the Wildlife RSA; an overall decrease in deciduous and mixedwood forest, and 
coniferous habitat within the RSA of 0.3%  and 0.7%, respectively. As outlined in Section 6.2.11, potential 
effects on bats will be mitigated by: routing parallel to existing linear disturbances; utilizing shared 
workspace on existing rights-of-way; and limiting vegetation control along the pipeline right-of-way during 
operation to the extent practical. It is expected that other operators in the Wildlife RSA will employ similar 
best practices. No mitigation measures beyond the Project-specific mitigation already proposed in 
Section 6.2.11 are deemed to be warranted to address incremental cumulative effects of the Project on 
bats. 

The Project’s contribution to cumulative effects is reversible in the long-term, once forest habitat 
regenerates over the Project Footprint (Table 7.30, point c). 

 
   

Page 7-63 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Cumulative Effects on Forest Birds 
The Project is likely to interact with existing and reasonably foreseeable developments to have an 
incremental cumulative effect on habitat, movement and mortality risk of forest birds. Changes in habitat 
suitability for forest birds as a result of clearing (habitat loss, creation of habitat edge) and widening of 
existing corridors (reduced connectivity) may act cumulatively with reasonably foreseeable developments 
(Tables 7.1A-C) in the Wildlife RSA.  

Forest gaps, such as those created by utility corridors, affect movements of forest birds (Bayne et al. 2005, 
Fleming and Schmiegelow 2002, Desrochers and Hannon 1997). Wider corridor widths have been found 
to have increased barrier effects on bird movements over narrower corridors (Desrochers and 
Hannon 1997), and parallel forest openings can cause a cumulative barrier effect at the landscape scale 
for some species (Belisle and St. Clair 2001). Residual forest patches, or detours, may facilitate bird 
movements across gaps (Desrochers and Hannon 1997, St. Clair et al. 1998). 

The Project parallels existing pipeline rights-of-way, roads and seismic lines for approximately 77% of the 
total pipeline length. Minor deviations from the existing linear corridors are to facilitate crossing 
watercourses or avoidance of existing infrastructure. The Project in combination with other reasonably 
foreseeable developments will affect approximately 31.6 ha of deciduous and mixedwood forest and 
225.6 ha of coniferous forest habitat the Wildlife RSA; an overall decrease in deciduous and mixedwood 
forest, and coniferous habitat within the RSA of 0.3%  and 0.7%, respectively. 

As outlined in Section 6.2.11, potential effects on forest birds will be mitigated by: routing parallel to existing 
linear disturbances for 77% of the length of the pipeline; utilizing shared workspace on existing rights-of-
way; scheduling pipeline construction activities outside of the migratory bird RAP and a nest sweep is 
planned prior to clearing the proposed compressor station site; and limiting vegetation control along the 
pipeline right-of-way during operation to the extent practical. It is expected that other operators in the 
Wildlife RSA will employ similar best practices. No mitigation measures beyond the Project-specific 
mitigation already proposed in Section 6.2.11 are deemed to be warranted to address incremental 
cumulative effects of the Project on forest birds. With the implementation of the recommended mitigation, 
the Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on forest birds within the Wildlife RSA is anticipated to be 
low in magnitude and reversible in the long-term, once vegetation community composition and structure 
within the construction right-of-way are re-established (Table 7.30, point d).   

Cumulative Effects on Olive-sided Flycatcher 
The Project is likely to interact with existing and reasonably foreseeable developments to have an 
incremental cumulative effect on habitat, movement and mortality risk of olive-sided flycatcher. Changes in 
habitat suitability for olive-sided flycatcher as a result of clearing (habitat loss, creation of habitat edge) and 
widening of existing corridors (reduced connectivity) may act cumulatively with reasonably foreseeable 
developments (Tables 7.1A-C) in the Wildlife RSA. Olive-sided flycatchers are considered an early post-
fire dependent species and make use of natural openings. The Project will increase open habitat; however, 
anthropogenic disturbances may act as ecological sinks (i.e., may not provide as suitable breeding habitat 
as natural forest openings). Therefore, disturbed habitat within the Project Footprint may not be effective 
for olive-sided flycatcher until the forest structure no longer has characteristics of a human development.  

The Project parallels existing roads, pipeline rights-of-way and seismic lines for approximately 77% of the 
total pipeline length. Minor deviations from the existing linear corridors are to facilitate crossing 
watercourses or avoidance of existing infrastructure. The Project in combination with other reasonably 
foreseeable developments will affect approximately 31.6 ha of deciduous and mixedwood forest and 
225.6 ha of coniferous forest habitat the Wildlife RSA; an overall decrease in deciduous and mixedwood 
forest, and coniferous habitat within the RSA of 0.3%  and 0.7%, respectively. In addition, the Project in 
combination with other reasonably foreseeable developments will affect approximately 1669.4 ha of 
regenerating forested areas in the Wildlife RSA; an overall decrease in regenerating forest areas within the 
Wildlife RSA of 1.8%.  

As outlined in Section 6.2.11, potential effects on olive-sided flycatcher will be mitigated by: routing parallel 
to existing linear disturbances; utilizing shared workspace on existing rights-of-way; scheduling pipeline 
construction activities outside of the migratory bird RAP and a nest sweep is planned prior to clearing the 
 

   
Page 7-64 

 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
proposed compressor station site; and limiting vegetation control along the pipeline right-of-way during 
operation to the extent practical. It is expected that other operators in the Wildlife RSA will employ similar 
best practices. No mitigation measures beyond the Project-specific mitigation already proposed in 
Table 6.2.24 are deemed to be warranted to address incremental cumulative effects of the Project on olive-
sided flycatcher.  

With the implementation of the recommended mitigation, the Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on 
olive-sided flycatcher within the Wildlife RSA is anticipated to be low in magnitude and reversible in the 
long-term, once forest habitat regenerates over the Project Footprint and no longer has characteristics of a 
human development (Table 7.30, point e).   

Cumulative Effects of Rusty Blackbird 
The Project is likely to interact with existing and reasonably foreseeable developments to have an 
incremental cumulative effect on habitat, movement and mortality risk of rusty blackbird. Changes in habitat 
suitability for rusty blackbird as a result of alteration of wetland habitat may act cumulatively with reasonably 
foreseeable developments (Tables 7.1A-C) in the Wildlife RSA. The Project and other reasonably 
foreseeable developments will affect wetland habitat within the Wildlife RSA which will cause an incremental 
reduction in habitat for wildlife species that rely on wetland habitats. Wetland habitat has been shown to 
regenerate quickly after disturbance (refer to Section 6.2.11.4). 

As outlined in Section 6.2.11, potential effects on rusty blackbird will be mitigated by: routing parallel to 
existing linear disturbances; utilizing shared workspace on existing rights of-way; scheduling pipeline 
construction activities outside of the migratory bird RAP and a nest sweep is planned prior to clearing the 
proposed compressor station site; limiting disturbance within wetlands during construction; and reclaiming 
the construction right-of-way within wetlands to promote natural regeneration of wetland habitat. It is 
expected that other operators in the Wildlife RSA will employ similar best practices. No mitigation measures 
beyond the Project-specific mitigation already proposed in Table 6.2.24 are deemed to be warranted to 
address incremental cumulative effects of the Project on rusty blackbird.  

With the implementation of recommended mitigation, the Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on 
rusty blackbird within the Wildlife RSA is anticipated to be of low magnitude. Revegetation of disturbed 
riparian and wetland vegetation will begin during the operations phase. Wetland habitat has been shown to 
regenerate quickly after disturbance (refer to Section 6.2.11.4). Establishment of herbaceous and shrub 
wetland vegetation will occur in a much shorter timeframe than forested riparian and treed wetland habitats, 
which will take decades to regenerate. The cumulative effect of the Project on wetland birds is, therefore, 
reversible in the long-term, once riparian and treed wetland vegetation regenerates over the Project 
Footprint (Table 7.30, point f). 

Incremental Effects on Western Toad 
The Project is likely to interact with existing and reasonably foreseeable disturbances to have an 
incremental cumulative effect on habitat, movement and mortality risk of western toad.  

Changes in habitat suitability for western toad as a result of alteration of wetland and upland habitat may 
act cumulatively with reasonably foreseeable developments (Tables 7.1A-C) in the Wildlife RSA to affect 
western toads. As outlined in Section 6.2.11, potential effects on western toads will be mitigated by: 
scheduling clearing and construction activities in the winter (i.e., outside of the amphibian breeding season) 
when western toads are inactive; utilizing existing disturbance to the extent practical; using minimum 
disturbance construction techniques to facilitate natural regeneration; implementing mitigation measures to 
reduce effects to riparian and wetland habitat; recontouring wetlands following construction; and allowing 
wetlands to naturally revegetate following construction. It is expected that other operators in the Wildlife 
RSA will employ similar best practices. No mitigation measures beyond the Project-specific mitigation 
already proposed in refer to Table 6.2.24 are deemed to be warranted to address incremental cumulative 
effects of the Project on western toads. 

With the implementation of the recommended mitigation, the Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on 
western toad within the Wildlife RSA is concluded to be low in magnitude. The cumulative effect of the 

 
   

Page 7-65 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Project is reversible in the long-term, once riparian and treed wetland vegetation regenerates over the 
Project Footprint (Table 7.30, point [g]). 

7.2.9.3 Summary 

As identified in Table 7.30, the Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on woodland caribou is 
considered to be significant, given that disturbance within the ESAR is already at 81% of the range 
(i.e., beyond the Environment Canada’s target of 35%),, and despite the fact the incremental disturbance 
of the Project is small (<0.1% incremental direct disturbance to the ESAR), whereas the Project’s 
contribution to cumulative effects on wolverine, bats, olive-sided flycatcher, rusty blackbird and western 
toad will be not significant. 

7.2.10 Human Occupancy and Resource Use 

7.2.10.1 Potential Cumulative Effects 

The potential and likely socio-economic residual effects associated with the construction and operations of 
the Project on human occupancy and resource use were identified in Section 6.2.12 and are listed in 
Table 7.32 along with the identification of existing activities and reasonably foreseeable developments 
acting in combination with the Project.  

TABLE 7.32 
 

POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF THE PROJECT ON  
HORU CONSIDERED FOR THE CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ASSESSMENT 

Potential  
Residual Effects 

Spatial 
Boundary1 Component 

Temporal 
Boundary 

Potential 
Cumulative Effect 

Existing Activities/Reasonably  
Foreseeable Developments with Residual  

Effects Acting in Combination with the Project 
1. Decrease in 

quality of outdoor 
recreational 
experience of 
Aboriginal and 
non-Aboriginal 
resource users 
during 
construction and 
site-specific 
maintenance 

RSA Pipeline and 
compressor 
station  

Construction Disturbance of land and 
resource use areas and 
disruption of land-based 
activities 

• Existing activities/disturbance: timber 
harvesting, transmission development, 
transportation development, oil and gas 
exploration and development, and fire. 

• Reasonably foreseeable developments within 
the HORU RSA listed in Table 7.1A-C. 

• All phases of construction could interact with 
the above activities in addition site-specific 
maintenance and PCM activities. 

2.  Loss of forestry 
resources and 
reduction of land 
base for timber 
harvest 

Footprint Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

Construction to 
Operations 

3.  Disruption of 
outfitting and 
non-traditional 
trapping, hunting 
and fishing 
activities of 
Aboriginal and 
non-Aboriginal 
land users during 
construction 

RSA Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

Construction 

4.  Sensory 
disturbance for 
land and resource 
users 

RSA Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

Construction to 
Operation 

Sensory or viewshed 
disturbance 

• Existing activities/disturbance: timber 
harvesting, transmission development, 
transportation development, oil and gas 
exploration and development, and fire. 

• Reasonably foreseeable developments within 
the HORU RSA listed in Table 7.1A-C. 

• All phases of construction could interact with 
the above activities in addition site-specific 
maintenance and PCM activities. 

 

 
   

Page 7-66 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 7.32  Cont'd 

Potential  
Residual Effects 

Spatial 
Boundary1 Component 

Temporal 
Boundary 

Potential 
Cumulative Effect 

Existing Activities/Reasonably  
Foreseeable Developments with Residual  

Effects Acting in Combination with the Project 
5.  Alteration of 

viewsheds 
RSA Pipeline and 

compressor 
station 

Construction to 
Operation 

  

Note: 1 LSA = HORU LSA; RSA = HORU RSA 
 

7.2.10.2 Significance Evaluation of Potential Cumulative Effects 

A qualitative assessment was considered the most appropriate method to evaluate the significance of 
potential cumulative effects on human occupancy and resource use due to the lack of quantitative data and 
accepted standards, guidelines and ecological thresholds. This qualitative assessment relied on available 
literature research and the professional judgement of the assessment team.  

Table 7.33 provides a summary of the significance evaluation of the Project’s contribution to potential 
cumulative effects on human occupancy and resource use. The rationale used to evaluate the significance 
of each of the cumulative effects is provided in below. 

TABLE 7.33 
 

SIGNIFICANCE EVALUATION OF THE PROJECT’S  
CONTRIBUTION TO CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ON HORU 

Potential Cumulative 
Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 

a. Disturbance of land and 
resource use areas and 
disruption of land-based 
activities 

Impact Balance: Negative Land-based activities may be affected during construction and operations of the 
Project. 

Spatial Boundary: HORU RSA The HORU RSA is considered by the assessment team to be the appropriate spatial 
scale where potential cumulative effects are considered to be non-trivial. 

Duration: Short to Long-term The events which would act cumulatively to cause disturbance of land and resource 
use areas and disruption of land-based activities will occur during construction and 
extend for the life of the Project. 

Frequency: Continuous The events acting cumulatively to cause disturbance of land and resource use areas 
and disruption of land-based activities will occur continually over the assessment 
period. 

Reversibility: Short to 
Long-term 

Disturbance of land and resource use areas and disruption of land-based activities 
resulting from the construction of the Project acting in combination with reasonably 
foreseeable developments in the HORU RSA will occur during construction and will 
extend beyond the first two years of the operations phase. 

Magnitude: Low Given that the Project is located in an area predominantly used for oil and gas activities. 
Probability: High Construction activities for the Project will overlap with hunting and fishing seasons, and 

trapping activities, and it is likely that reasonably foreseeable developments will be 
constructed during the fall/winter to take advantage of frozen soil conditions. 

Confidence: High Based on the experience of the assessment team. 
Significance: Not Significant  The Project’s contribution to effects on land-based activities is reversible in the short to 

long-term and of low magnitude and is therefore considered not significant.  
b. Sensory or viewshed 

disturbance 
Impact Balance: Negative The visual quality of the landscape, adjacent to the construction right-of-way, may be 

adversely affected by the Project. The visual quality of the landscape surrounding the 
compressor station site will be affected by the installation of permanent facilities. 

Spatial Boundary: HORU RSA Sensory or viewshed disturbance may result from the Project acting in combination with 
landscape alterations created by existing activities and reasonably foreseeable 
developments in the HORU RSA. 

Duration: Short-term The event causing the sensory disturbance will occur during construction and extend 
for the life of the Project. 

 
   

Page 7-67 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 7.33  Cont’d 

Potential Cumulative 
Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 

b. Sensory or viewshed 
disturbance (cont’d) 

Frequency: Continuous Though construction activities are isolated, sensory disturbance from the proposed 
compressor station will occur continually over the assessment period. 

Reversibility: Long-term The cumulative sensory or viewshed disturbance is not expected to reverse until 
abandonment of the Project. 

Magnitude: Low It is considered to be within social acceptance given the remote location and the limited 
number of human receptors. 

Probability: High Construction and operations of the Project, in combination with existing activities and 
reasonably foreseeable developments will, to varying degrees, result in alteration of the 
natural landscape and increased emissions. 

Confidence: Moderate Based on assumptions made in the quantitative analysis and a good understanding of 
cause-effect relationships using data pertinent to the Project area. 

Significance: Not Significant  The cumulative sensory or viewshed disturbance is reversible in the long-term but of 
low magnitude given the remote location and limited number of human receptors and is 
therefore considered not significant.  

Note: Significant Residual Socio-Economic Effect: A residual socio-economic effect is considered significant if the effect is predicted to be: 
­ high magnitude, high probability, short to medium-term reversibility and regional, provincial or national in extent that cannot be technically or 
 economically mitigated; or 
­ high magnitude, high probability, long-term or permanent reversibility and any spatial boundary that cannot be technically or economically 
 mitigated. 

 

Disturbance of Land and Resource Use Areas and Disruption of Land-Based Activities 
Land-based activities in the HORU RSA include recreational activities, trapping, hunting, fishing and 
outfitting. These land-based activities may be affected during construction and operations of the Project. 
There is the potential that reasonably foreseeable developments would also disrupt land-based activities 
during construction and operations by disrupting users and a loss of forestry resources.  

Disturbance to outdoor recreation use areas and disturbance to managed forest areas will result in a loss 
of forestry resources and reduction of land base for timber harvest and a decrease in quality of outdoor 
recreational experience of Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal resource users.  

It is anticipated that some of the developments identified in the HORU RSA listed in Tables 7.1A-C will 
cause effects on land-based activities during construction and operations of the Project. Although their 
construction schedules are unavailable, for the purpose of the cumulative effects assessment for disruption 
of land use activities by land users, it was assumed that these developments would be constructed during 
the same period as the Project.  

The Project will act cumulatively with existing activities and reasonably foreseeable developments to cause 
effects on land-based activities during construction and operations. The mitigation measures proposed in 
Sections 6.2.4, 6.2.6 and 6.2.12 will reduce the cumulative effects of disturbance of land and resource use 
areas and disruption of land-based activities. It is expected that operators of other reasonably foreseeable 
developments will implement similar mitigation. No mitigation measures beyond the Project-specific 
mitigation already proposed in Table 6.2.27 are deemed to be warranted. 

The Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on disturbance of land and resource use areas and 
disruption of land-based activities within the HORU RSA during construction and operations of the Project 
is reversible in the short-term to long-term since the disruption of activities resulting from the construction 
and operations of the Project in the HORU RSA will occur throughout the life of the Project (Table 7.33, 
point [a]).   

Sensory and Viewshed Disturbance 
The Project is anticipated to have longer term visual effects related the presence of the new pipeline right-
of-way in select areas and new above ground structures during operations. Potential long-term visual 
effects of new pipeline right-of-way will be reduced by paralleling an existing linear disturbance for 77% of 
the route. However, Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal hunters, and outfitters in the HORU RSA may be affected 
by an alteration of the viewshed. The proposed Leismer East Compressor Station will result in new 

 
   

Page 7-68 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
permanent aboveground facilities. Construction of the proposed Leismer East Compressor Station will 
result in approximately 4.34 ha of new cut. Since clearing activities influence the viewshed through the 
removal of trees, existing activities, the Project and reasonably foreseeable developments (as identified in 
Tables 7.1A-C) will act cumulatively to alter viewsheds in the HORU RSA.  

Nuisance air emissions and noise will occur during the construction of the Project and may at times affect 
land users living and resource users in the vicinity of Project. Possible effects may include air emissions 
(including odours) and noise from construction equipment and vehicles, and dust from vehicles. Also, 
equipment, areas of land disturbance, and the activity of construction workers will be visible to nearby land 
and resource users during periods of construction and site-specific maintenance. There may also be 
periods of night lighting around construction sites. The proposed Leismer East Compressor Station will 
increase noise in the area and will produce GHG emissions through combustion of natural gas to drive the 
compressor turbines during operations.  

If natural recovery is not adequate, NGTL will enhance the recovery of natural vegetation (e.g., tree 
seedling/shrub planting), as outlined in Section 6.2.9, to reduce the visual intrusion of the right-of-way and 
related cumulative effects on the viewshed. It is expected that operators of reasonably foreseeable 
developments will also implement similar measures developed in accordance with industry and provincial 
regulatory guidelines to reduce visual alteration.  

No mitigation measures beyond the Project-specific mitigation already proposed in Table 6.2.27 are 
deemed to be warranted. 

The Project’s contribution to cumulative effect on visual aesthetics and sensory disturbance within the 
HORU RSA is considered to be reversible in the long-term since the cumulative effect of sensory and 
viewshed disturbance is expected to reverse following the decommissioning or abandonment of the Project 
(Table 7.33, point [b]).  

7.2.10.3 Summary 

As identified in Table 7.33, there are no situations for human occupancy and resource use that would result 
in a significant cumulative socio-economic effect. Consequently, it is concluded that the Project’s 
contribution to cumulative effects on human occupancy and resource use within the HORU RSA will be not 
significant. 

7.2.11 Heritage Resources 

Overall, the Project has the potential to affect previously identified and newly discovered heritage resources 
as a result of ground disturbance activities; however, with the implementation of industry standard and 
provincially regulated mitigation measures during the pre-construction and construction phases of the 
Project, there are no residual effects of the Project on heritage resources. As such, an assessment of 
cumulative effects on heritage resources was not warranted.  

7.2.12 Traditional Land and Resource Use 

NGTL has engaged Aboriginal communities with an interest in the Project. Project effects on TLU were 
assessed through engagement activities, TLU studies including discussions, map reviews, interviews, 
through ground reconnaissance with Aboriginal community representatives during the biophysical field 
programs and through a review of available literature research. These studies are expected to confirm the 
predicted Project-related effects on TLU. 

7.2.12.1 Potential Cumulative Effects 

The potential and likely residual effects associated with the construction and operations of the Project on 
TLU are identified in Section 6.2.14 and are listed in Table 7.34 along with the identification of reasonably 
foreseeable developments acting in combination with the Project, as well as the predicted cumulative effect 
and additional mitigation measures.  

 
   

Page 7-69 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
TABLE 7.34 

 
POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF THE  

PROJECT ON TLRU CONSIDERED FOR THE CUMULATIVE EFFECT ASSESSMENT 

Potential Residual 
Effect 

Spatial 
Boundary1 Component 

Temporal 
Boundary 

Potential 
Cumulative 

Effect 

Existing Activities/Reasonably Foreseeable 
Developments with Residual Effects Acting in 

Combination with the Project 
1. Site-specific TLRU 

identified during 
ongoing 
engagement may 
be affected during 
engagement and 
operations 

RSA Pipeline and 
compressor 

station 

Construction and 
operations 

Project 
contribution to 
cumulative effects 
on TLU. 

• Existing activities: timber harvesting, utility 
activities, transportation development as well as 
oil and gas exploration and development.  

• Reasonably foreseeable developments within the 
RSA listed in Tables 7.1A-C.  

• Project-related activities that could interact 
include clearing, strippings salvaging, grading, 
backfilling and reclamation. 2. Disruption of subsistence 

activities during 
construction and 
operations 

RSA Pipeline and 
compressor 

station 

Construction and 
operations 

3. Alteration of 
subsistence 
resources 

RSA Pipeline and 
compressor 

station 

Construction and 
operations 

4. Combined effects 
on TLU 

RSA Pipeline and 
compressor 

station 

Construction and 
operations 

Note: 1 RSA = TLRU RSA. 
 

7.2.12.2 Significance Evaluation of Potential Cumulative Effects 

A qualitative assessment was considered the most appropriate method to evaluate the significance of 
potential cumulative effects on TLU, due to the lack of quantitative data and accepted standards, guidelines 
and ecological thresholds. This qualitative assessment relied on Project engagement activities, TLU studies 
including discussions, map reviews, reviews of available literature research and the professional judgment 
of the assessment team.  

Table 7.35 provides a summary of the significance evaluation of the proposed Project’s contribution to 
potential cumulative effects on TLU. The rationale used to evaluate the significance of this cumulative effect 
is provided below. 

TABLE 7.35 
 

SIGNIFICANCE EVALUATION OF THE PROJECT’S  
CONTRIBUTION TO THE CUMULATIVE EFFECT ON TLRU 

Potential Cumulative Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
a.  Project contribution to 

cumulative effects on 
TLU 

Impact balance: Negative The Project will potentially contribute to adverse cumulative effects on TLU identified 
during ongoing consultation as a result of Project construction and operations. 

Spatial boundary: TLRU RSA  The Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on TLU may extend to areas of the 
TLRU RSA. 

Duration: Short-Term to 
Long-Term 

The event causing the Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on TLU is 
construction of the pipeline and compressor station or the operations of the compressor 
station. 

Frequency: Isolated to 
continuous 

The event causing the Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on TLU during 
construction is confined to a specific period. During operations, the events causing is 
the operations of the compressor station. 

Reversibility: Long-Term The Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on TLU  since these effects may occur 
for the duration of the operations phase and could extend greater than 10 years when 
the Project is no longer in operation. 

 

 
   

Page 7-70 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 7.35  Cont’d 

Potential Cumulative Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 
a.  Project contribution to 

cumulative effects on TLU 
(cont’d) 

Magnitude: Low to High Mitigation strategies are in place to reduce the Project’s contribution to cumulative 
effects on TLU to a low to medium magnitude, with the exception of TLU potentially 
related to woodland caribou. The magnitude of the Project’s contribution to cumulative 
effects on woodland caribou is considered to be high given that the existing cumulative 
conditions are beyond regulatory standards for this historically traditionally harvested 
species. 

Probability: High Based on past projects of similar scope, the professional experience of the assessment 
team and the results of the TLU studies conducted to date. 

Confidence: Moderate Based on the professional experience of the assessment team and the results of the 
TLU studies conducted to date. 

Significance: Not Significant to 
Significant 

Generally, the Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on TLU t is reversible in the 
short to long-term and of low to medium magnitude and is, therefore, considered not 
significant. However, the Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on woodland 
caribou is considered to be significant and, therefore, the Project’s contribution to 
cumulative effects TLU values related to woodland caribou is considered to be 
significant.  

Notes: 1 RSA = TLRU RSA. 
 2 Significant Residual Socio-Economic Effect: A residual socio-economic effect is considered significant if the effect is predicted to be: 

­ high magnitude, high probability, short to medium-term reversibility and regional, provincial or national in extent that cannot be 
technically or economically mitigated; or 

­ high magnitude, high probability, long-term or permanent reversibility and any spatial boundary that cannot be technically or 
economically mitigated. 

 

Cumulative Effects on TLU 
Subsistence hunting, trapping, fishing and harvesting activities by Aboriginal communities occur throughout 
the TLRU RSA. These TLU activities, including site-specific TLU, may be disrupted or altered during the 
construction and operations of the Project. The potential exists that reasonably foreseeable developments 
would also have the potential to disrupt or altered subsistence activities and site-specific TLU by Aboriginal 
communities. For the purposes of the cumulative effects assessment  on TLU, it was assumed that these 
developments would occur during the same construction period as the Project.  

The results of the TLU studies received to date from participating Aboriginal communities indicate that 
subsistence activities are practiced in the TLRU RSA and that site-specific TLU features have been 
identified within the Project Footprint and TLRU LSA. Concerns regarding subsistence activities and TLU 
sites were addressed by NGTL’s proposed mitigation measures, and there are no outstanding concerns 
(Appendix 10). Should subsistence resources and site-specific TLU be identified during ongoing 
engagement with participating Aboriginal communities, the mitigation measures outlined in Table 6.2.30 
will be implemented. Although it cannot be guaranteed, it is expected that operators of other reasonably 
foreseeable developments will implement similar measures to reduce the cumulative effect on subsistence 
activities and identified and potential site-specific TLU in the TLRU RSA.  

The Project’s contribution to the cumulative effects on TLU is considered to be of medium magnitude when 
compared to existing and reasonably foreseeable developments (e.g., timber harvesting) since most effects 
will be limited to the construction phase of the Project (i.e., disruption of fishing and harvesting). In addition, 
the effects assessment results for the biophysical elements conclude that equivalent land use capability will 
be maintained by the application of the proposed mitigation strategies (see Sections 6.2.3, 6.2.7, 6.2.9, 
6.2.10 and 6.2.12). Although mitigation measures proposed in Table 6.2.30 and throughout this ESA do not 
completely eliminate the Project’s contribution to the cumulative effects on TLU in the TLRU RSA, mitigation 
strategies are in place and will also be used in the event any unidentified subsistence resources or site-
specific TLU are discovered during ongoing consultation. No mitigation measures beyond the Project-
specific mitigation already proposed are deemed to be warranted. 

The Project’s contribution to the cumulative effect on TLU is reversible in the short to long-term. For 
instance, effects arising from the construction of the Project (e.g., disruption or alteration to fishing and 
harvesting activities, disturbance of site-specific TLU) generally will be reversible within the construction 
 

   
Page 7-71 

 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
phase or within any one year of the operations phase depending upon the growth time required for 
vegetation species in the area while other disruptions or alterations of subsistence activities may be 
reversible in the long-tem (i.e., hunting and trapping activities and site-specific TLU) due to the sensory 
disturbance caused by the proposed Leismer East Compressor Station. Mitigation measures outlined in 
Tables 6.2.29, 6.2.26 and 6.2.21 are expected to reduce effects on traditional and non-traditional hunting 
practices and wildlife movement, respectively. The Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on TLU 
generally is considered to be of low to medium magnitude since mitigation is expected to be effective at 
reducing the effect to a moderate modification of the socio-economic environment and strategies are in 
place in the event any unidentified TLU sites or subsistence activities are discovered as a result of the 
Project (Table 7.35, point [a]). However, the exception is TLU values related to woodland caribou. The 
assessment of species at risk (Section 7.2.9) has determined that the magnitude of the overall cumulative 
effects and the cumulative effects of the Project on woodland caribou is high, as existing conditions are 
beyond regulatory standards. While no subsistence harvesting of woodland caribou was identified within 
the TLRU RSA in any Project-specific TLU studies, TLU desktop review has indicated that woodland 
caribou are a traditionally harvested species for Aboriginal groups potentially affected by the Project. 
Consequently, the magnitude of the cumulative effect on TLU related to woodland caribou is considered to 
be high and significant. 

Summary 
As identified in Table 7.35, with the exception of TLU values related to caribou, there are no situations with 
regard to TLU that would result in a significant cumulative socio-economic effect. However, cumulative 
effects related to caribou are expected to be significant (Section 7.2.9). As a result, the Project’s contribution 
to cumulative effects on TLU potentially related to woodland caribou is considered to be significant. While 
subsistence harvesting of woodland caribou was not identified within the TLRU RSA in any Project-specific 
TLU studies, TLU desktop review has indicated that woodland caribou are a traditionally harvested species 
for Aboriginal groups potentially affected by the Project.. Consequently, it is concluded that the cumulative 
effect on TLU within the TLRU RSA will be not significant, with the exception of TLU values related to 
woodland caribou, which will be considered significant. 

7.2.13 Social and Cultural Well-Being 

7.2.13.1 Potential Cumulative Effects 

The potential and likely socio-economic residual effect associated with the construction and operations of 
the Project on social and cultural well-being was identified in Section 6.2.15 and is listed in Table 7.36 along 
with the identification of existing activities and reasonably foreseeable developments acting in combination 
with the Project. In accordance with Guide A.2.7 of the NEB Filing Manual, further analysis of the residual 
effect of increased contracting procurement and job opportunities is not provided since this effect has been 
determined to have a positive impact balance. 

TABLE 7.36 
 

POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECT OF THE PROJECT ON SOCIAL AND  
CULTURAL WELL-BEING CONSIDERED FOR THE CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ASSESSMENT 

Potential Residual 
Effect 

Spatial 
Boundary1 Component 

Temporal 
Boundary 

Potential 
Cumulative Effect 

Existing Activities/Reasonably Foreseeable 
Developments with Residual Effects Acting in 

Combination with the Project 
1. Disruption of 

community life by 
transient workers 

RSA Pipeline and 
compressor 
station 

Construction  Effects on community 
way-of-life. 

• Existing activities/disturbance: timber harvesting, 
transmission development, transportation 
development, oil and gas exploration and 
development, and fire. 

• Reasonably foreseeable developments within the 
Socio-economic RSA listed in Table 7.1A-C. 

• All phases of construction could interact with the 
above activities in addition to site-specific 
maintenance and PCM activities. 

Note: 1 RSA = Socio-economic RSA. 
 

 
   

Page 7-72 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
7.2.13.2 Significance Evaluation of Potential Cumulative Effects 

A qualitative assessment was considered the most appropriate method to evaluate the significance of 
potential cumulative effect on social and cultural well-being, due to the lack of quantitative data and 
accepted standards, guidelines and ecological thresholds. This qualitative assessment relied on available 
literature research and the professional judgement of the assessment team.  

Table 7.37 provides a summary of the significance evaluation of the Project’s contribution to potential 
cumulative effects on social and cultural well-being. The rationale used to evaluate the significance the 
cumulative effect is provided in below. 

TABLE 7.37 
 

SIGNIFICANCE EVALUATION OF THE PRJOECT’S CONTRIBUTION 
TO CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ON SOCIAL AND CULTURAL WELL-BEING 

Potential Incremental 
Cumulative Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 

a. Disruption of community 
life by transient workers 

Impact Balance: Negative The Project can disrupt community life.  
Spatial Boundary: 
Socio-Economic RSA 

The Socio-Economic RSA is considered by the assessment team to be the appropriate 
spatial scale where potential cumulative effects are considered to be non-trivial. 

Duration: Short-Term The events which would act cumulatively to disrupt community life are limited to the 
construction phase of the Project. 

Frequency: Isolated The events acting cumulatively to disrupt community life are confined to a specific period 
(i.e., construction of the Project, construction of reasonably foreseeable developments). 

Reversibility: Short-Term The disruption of community life resulting from the construction of the Project in the Socio-
economic RSA is limited to the construction phase. 

Magnitude: Low Given the size and population of Fort McMurray and the Town of Athabasca, the effects are 
not considered to be approaching any general standards of tolerance because the 
communities have the ability to accept the construction crew given the size of the workforce 
and duration of construction activities and low given that they will be staying in construction 
camps. 

Probability: High Construction activities for the Project will overlap with reasonably foreseeable 
developments. 

Confidence: Low It is difficult to predict human behaviour.  
Significance: Not Significant  The Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on the disruption of community life in Socio-

economic LSA and Socio-economic RSA is of low magnitude and reversible in the short-
term and therefore not significant.  

Note: Significant Residual Socio-Economic Effect: A residual socio-economic effect is considered significant if the effect is predicted to be: 
­ high magnitude, high probability, short to medium-term reversibility and regional, provincial or national in extent that cannot be technically or 

economically mitigated; or 
­ high magnitude, high probability, long-term or permanent reversibility and any spatial boundary that cannot be technically or economically 

mitigated. 
 

Fort McMurray acts as a service hub to the oil and gas industry in northern Alberta; located 84 km north of 
the Project, it therefore is likely to experience the greatest workforce interactions. Fort McMurray and the 
Town of Athabasca (155 km south) are the nearest major centres to the Project that provide all major 
services required for the construction workforce of approximately 450 workers. Temporary construction 
camps will be used during the construction phase, which will limit the interaction workers have with 
communities. However, temporary workers may still interact with communities in the Socio-economic RSA 
during time-off. It is expected that the Project construction workforce will be working extended hours, which 
will not leave a substantial amount of time for recreational activities after work hours. It is also expected 
that some of the workforce will be local.  

It is anticipated that the workforce of some of the reasonably foreseeable developments identified in the 
Socio-economic RSA listed in Tables 7.1A-C will require accommodation and other services in Fort 
McMurray and the Town of Athabasca during construction of the Project. Although construction schedules 
for these developments are unavailable, for the purposes of the cumulative effects assessment for social 
and cultural well-being, it was assumed they would be constructed during the same construction period as 
the Project. Given the number of reasonably foreseeable developments that may act cumulatively with the 
 

   
Page 7-73 

 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Project to disrupt community life, it is anticipated that these developments will contribute more to community 
disruption by transient workers than the Project. 

Mitigation measures proposed in Table 6.2.32 will reduce the Project-related cumulative effects on effects 
to community way-of-life. It is expected that all or most companies involved in existing activities and 
reasonably foreseeable developments within the Socio-economic RSA have codes of conduct in place 
similar to those developed by NGTL to encourage respectful behaviour in communities during construction 
of their projects. Nevertheless, companies cannot prevent workers from engaging in certain behaviours and 
unruly behaviour by some transient workers may occur. No mitigation measures beyond the Project-specific 
mitigation already proposed in Table 6.2.32 are deemed to be warranted.  

The Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on community way-of-life within the Socio-economic RSA 
during construction of the Project is considered to be of low magnitude since Fort McMurray and the Town 
of Athabasca have large populations with ample amenities to absorb the cumulative workforces of the 
Project and other reasonably foreseeable developments without effects to community way-of-life and 
because of the use of temporary construction camps for workers during the construction phase. This effect 
is considered reversible in the short-term since it is expected to reverse upon completion of construction 
activities. The degree of confidence is low due to the difficulty in predicting human behaviour (Table 7.37, 
point [a]).  

Summary 
As identified in Table 7.37, there are no situations with regard to social and cultural well-being that would 
result in a significant cumulative socio-economic effect. Consequently, it is concluded that the Project’s 
contribution to cumulative effects on social and cultural well-being within the Socio-economic RSA will be 
not significant. 

7.2.14 Human Health 

The potential and likely socio-economic residual effects associated with the construction and operations of 
the Project on human health identified in Section 6.2.16 includes the construction of the pipeline disrupting 
normal, daily living activities of some land users; and the health of land users may be affected in the event 
of an accident or malfunction. Since neither of these potential residual effects is considered to be likely, a 
cumulative effects assessment for human health was not conducted. 

7.2.15 Infrastructure and Services 

7.2.15.1 Potential Cumulative Effects 

The potential and likely socio-economic residual effects associated with the construction and operations of 
the Project on infrastructure and services were identified in Section 6.2.17 and are listed in Table 7.38 along 
with the identification of existing activities or reasonably foreseeable developments acting in combination 
with the Project.  

TABLE 7.38 
 

POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF THE PROJECT ON INFRASTRUCTURE 
AND SERVICES CONSIDERED FOR THE CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ASSESSMENT 

Potential Residual 
Effects 

Spatial 
Boundary1 Component 

Temporal 
Boundary 

Potential 
Cumulative Effect 

Existing Activities/Reasonably  
Foreseeable Developments with Residual  

Effects Acting in Combination with the Project 
1. Increase in 

traffic on 
highways and 
access roads 
during 
construction 

RSA Pipeline and 
compressor 

station 

Construction Effects on 
transportation 
infrastructure. 

• Existing activities/disturbance: timber harvesting, 
transmission development, transportation development, 
oil and gas exploration and development, and fire. 

• Reasonably foreseeable developments within the 
Socio-economic RSA listed in Table 7.1A-C. 

• All phases of construction could interact with the above 
activities in addition to site-specific maintenance and 
PCM activities. 

 
 

   
Page 7-74 

 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 7.38  Cont’d 

Potential Residual 
Effects 

Spatial 
Boundary1 Component 

Temporal 
Boundary 

Potential 
Cumulative Effect 

Existing Activities/Reasonably  
Foreseeable Developments with Residual  

Effects Acting in Combination with the Project 
2.  Increased 

demand on local 
emergency, 
protective and 
health care 
services during 
construction 

RSA Pipeline and 
compressor 

station 

Construction Increased demand 
on community 
infrastructure and 
services. 

• Existing activities/disturbance: timber harvesting, 
transmission development, transportation development, 
oil and gas exploration and development, and fire. 

• Reasonably foreseeable developments within the 
Socio-economic RSA listed in Table 7.1A-C. 

• All phases of construction could interact with the above 
activities in addition to site-specific maintenance and 
PCM activities. 3.  Temporary increase in solid 

and liquid waste 
flow to regional 
landfills, transfer 
station sites and 
wastewater 
treatment 
facilities during 
construction 

RSA Pipeline and 
compressor 

station 

Construction 

Note: 1 RSA = Socio-economic RSA. 
 

7.2.15.2 Significance Evaluation of Potential Cumulative Effects 

A qualitative assessment was considered the most appropriate method to evaluate the significance of 
potential cumulative effects on infrastructure and services due to the lack of quantitative data and accepted 
standards, guidelines and ecological thresholds. This qualitative assessment relied on available literature 
research and the professional judgement of the assessment team.  

Table 7.39 provides a summary of the significance evaluation of the Project’s contribution to potential 
cumulative effects on infrastructure and services. The rationale used to evaluate the significance of each 
of the cumulative effects is provided below. 

TABLE 7.39 
 

SIGNIFICANCE EVALUATION OF THE PROJECT’S CONTRIBUTION 
TO CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ON INFRASTRUCTURE AND SERVICES 

Potential Incremental 
Cumulative Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 

a. Effects on transportation 
infrastructure 

Impact Balance:  Negative Project activities will increase traffic in the Socio-Economic RSA. 
Spatial Boundary: 
Socio-Economic RSA 

Effects on transportation infrastructure resulting from the Project will in combination with 
existing activities and reasonably foreseeable developments in the Socio-economic 
RSA. 

Duration: Short-term The events which would act cumulatively to cause effects on transportation 
infrastructure occur during the construction phase. 

Frequency: Isolated The events causing cumulative effects on transportation infrastructure are confined to a 
specific period (i.e., construction of the Project). 

Reversibility: Short-term The Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on transportation infrastructure is limited 
to the Project’s construction phase. 

Magnitude: Low It is considered to be within social acceptance and not more than that of an 
inconvenience of nuisance. 

Probability: High Existing activities and reasonably foreseeable developments within the Socio-economic 
RSA have the potential to act cumulatively with the Project. 

Confidence: Moderate Based on a good understanding of cause-effect relationships, however, there is a lack 
of detailed Project traffic volume estimates. 

Significance: Not Significant  The cumulative effects on transportation infrastructure are considered to be of low 
magnitude and reversible in the short-term and therefore not significant. 

 

 
   

Page 7-75 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

TABLE 7.39  Cont’d 

Potential Incremental 
Cumulative Effect Criteria Rating Effects Characterization Rationale 

b. Increased demand on 
community infrastructure 
and services 

Impact Balance: Negative Project activities will increase demand on local infrastructure and services.  
Spatial Boundary: 
Socio-Economic RSA 

Increased demand on community infrastructure and services may result from the 
Project acting in combination with existing activities and reasonably foreseeable 
developments in the Socio-economic RSA. 

Duration: Short-term The events causing cumulative increased demand on community infrastructure and 
services are limited to the construction phase of the Project. 

Frequency: Isolated The events causing cumulative increased demand on community infrastructure and 
services are confined to a specific period. 

Reversibility: Short-term The Project’s contribution to cumulative increased demand on community infrastructure 
and services is limited to the Projects’ construction phase. 

Magnitude: Low It is considered to be within social acceptance and not more than that of an 
inconvenience of nuisance. 

Probability: High Existing activities and reasonably foreseeable developments within the Socio-economic 
RSA have the potential to act cumulatively with the Project. 

Confidence: Moderate The determination of significance is based on a good understanding of cause-effect 
relationships although there are challenges in predicting if an incident requiring local 
emergency services will occur. 

Significance: Not Significant  The cumulative increased demand on community infrastructure and services is 
considered to be of low magnitude and reversible in the short-term and therefore not 
significant. 

Notes: Significant Residual Socio-Economic Effect: A residual socio-economic effect is considered significant if the effect is predicted to be: 
­ high magnitude, high probability, short to medium-term reversibility and regional, provincial or national in extent that cannot be technically or 

economically mitigated; or 
­ high magnitude, high probability, long-term or permanent reversibility and any spatial boundary that cannot be technically or economically 

mitigated. 
 

Effects on Transportation Infrastructure 
The road transportation system in the Socio-economic RSA is used by residents, tourists and industrial 
users. Local roads, access roads, forestry roads and provincial highways will be used for the transportation 
of workers to the temporary construction camp location, the transportation of workers to and from 
construction sites, and the movement of equipment and supplies. The highest monthly traffic volumes in 
2013 on Highway 63 were from May to October (Alberta Transportation 2014) (Section 5.17.1). 
Construction of the Project will increase traffic volumes. It is assumed that reasonably foreseeable 
developments will be constructed during winter and, consequently, have the potential to act cumulatively 
with existing traffic levels and those arising from the Project.  

It is anticipated that the construction of some of the reasonably foreseeable developments within the 
Socio-economic RSA listed in Tables 7.1A-C will cause effects on transportation infrastructure, including 
increases in traffic on highways and access roads, during construction of the Project. Without knowing the 
anticipated traffic volume for each reasonably foreseeable development, it is difficult to predict the Project’s 
contribution to effects on transportation infrastructure. However, considering there are a limited number of 
developments in the Socio-economic RSA with the potential to be constructed during the construction 
period for the Project, the Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on transportation infrastructure is 
considered to be low in magnitude when compared to reasonably foreseeable developments. 

The mitigation measures outlined in Table 6.2.36, particularly the use of multi-passenger vehicles, will 
reduce vehicle and equipment traffic on local roads and, in turn, will reduce cumulative effects on traffic in 
the Socio-Economic RSA. It is anticipated that operators constructing reasonably foreseeable 
developments during the same period would also have measures in place to reduce effects on 
transportation infrastructure. No mitigation measures beyond the Project-specific mitigation already 
proposed in Table 6.2.36 are deemed warranted.  

 
   

Page 7-76 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
The Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on transportation infrastructure within the Socio-economic 
RSA is expected to be reversible in the short-term since it will be limited to the construction phase 
(Table 7.39, point [a]).  

Effects on Infrastructure and Services 
Increased demand on local emergency, protective and health care services and a temporary increase in 
solid and liquid waste flow to regional landfills, transfer station sites and wastewater treatment facilities will 
result in cumulative effects on infrastructure and services. Health care facilities are available in the Socio-
economic LSA. Fort McMurray is the nearest community that can provide all of the services necessary to 
respond to emergency situations that may arise during construction of the Project. Depending on the 
seriousness of the incident, air ambulance services are available in Fort McMurray. 

The nearest solid waste facility to the Project is the RM of Wood Buffalo Landfill located 8.5 km south of 
Fort McMurray on Highway 63. Recycling facilities are available in Fort McMurray (RM of Wood 
Buffalo 2014). The Fort McMurray Athabasca Water Treatment Plant is undergoing a major expansion, 
which will have capacity to provide services for a population of 133,000 (RM of Wood Buffalo 2014). 

Existing activities within the Socio-economic RSA which contribute to effects on infrastructure and services 
include oil and gas exploration and development, utility activities and transportation development. It is 
assumed that some of the reasonably foreseeable developments will be constructed concurrently with the 
Project and, consequently, have the potential to act cumulatively with the Project to cause effects on 
infrastructure and services.  

The mitigation measures outlined in Table 6.2.36 will reduce cumulative effects on infrastructure and 
services in the Socio-Economic RSA. The Contractor will collect all construction debris and other waste 
materials and dispose of daily at an approved facility and in accordance with the Chemical and Waste 
Management Plan (Appendix 1F) and the Spill Contingency Plan (Appendix 1E), unless otherwise 
authorized by the Environmental Inspector(s).It is expected that operators of reasonably foreseeable 
development activities will follow similar recycling and disposal practices as those implemented by NGTL 
to reduce waste flow. No mitigation measures beyond the Project-specific mitigation already proposed in 
Table 6.2.36 is deemed to be warranted. 

The overall cumulative effect on effect on infrastructure and services within the Socio-economic RSA 
attributed to existing activities, the Project and reasonably foreseeable developments is of low magnitude. 
This cumulative effect of the Project is considered to be reversible in the short-term (i.e., limited to the 
construction phase) (Table 7. 39 point b).  

7.2.15.3 Summary 

As identified in Table 7.39, there are no situations with regard to infrastructure and services that would 
result in a significant cumulative socio-economic effect. Consequently, it is concluded that the Project’s 
contribution to cumulative effects on infrastructure and services within the Socio-economic RSA will be not 
significant. 

7.2.16 Employment and Economy 

The potential socio-economic residual effects associated with the construction and operations of the Project 
on employment and economy are: increased contracting and procurement activities during construction 
and site-specific maintenance; opportunities for local and regional Project related employment during 
construction and site-specific maintenance; reduced resource-based business income or livelihoods during 
construction and site-specific maintenance; and increased tax revenue. In accordance with Guide A.2.7 of 
the NEB Filing Manual, further analysis of these residual effects is not provided since these effects have 
been determined to have a positive impact balance or were considered of low probability (see 
Section 6.2.19). 

 
   

Page 7-77 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
7.2.17 Accidents and Malfunctions 

The potential residual environmental effects associated with accidents and malfunctions were identified in 
Section 6.2.20 and include:  

• contamination and/or alteration of surface/groundwater quality, riparian habitat, wetland function, plants 
and ecological communities, wildlife and wildlife habitat, and the health of local residents due to spills 
during construction; 

• despite vigilance, fires may adversely affect vegetation, wildlife habitat, wetlands, infrastructure and 
services and human health; 

• damage to utility lines could lead to interruption of services and fires in the case of gas; and 

• a transportation accident may cause injury to humans, death to a wildlife species of concern, damage 
to property or critical habitat from a fire or severe contamination of lands or water, depending on the 
location and severity of the accident. 

None of these potential residual effects of the Project are considered to be likely (see Section 6.2.20) and, 
therefore, a cumulative effects assessment for accidents and malfunctions was not conducted. The 
Contingency Plans contained in the EPP prepared for the Project (Appendix 1) will be implemented to 
respond in the unlikely event of an accident, as well as contain and clean-up these incidents. 

7.3 Summary of the Assessment of Potential Cumulative Effects  

The cumulative environmental and socio-economic effects associated with the construction and operations 
of the Project are not unlike those routinely encountered during pipeline and associated infrastructure 
construction in forested setting. 

For each likely residual effect associated with the Project, existing activities and reasonably foreseeable 
developments whose residual effects that have or may act in combination with the Project were identified. 
Existing activities identified include timber harvesting, oil and gas exploration and development 
(i.e., pipelines, facilities, wells), utility development (i.e., transmission lines and substations), and 
transportation (i.e., road network) in the area. Future known developments include oil and gas activities and 
utility development.  

The potential cumulative effects associated with the following environmental and socio-economic elements 
were identified for: 

• physical elements such as soils and soil productivity, water quality and quantity, air 
emissions and acoustic environment; 

• biological elements such as fish and fish habitat, wetlands, vegetation, wildlife and wildlife 
habitat, and species at risk; and 

• socio-economic elements such as human occupancy and resource use, social and 
cultural well-being, and infrastructure and services. 

No likely residual effects were identified in association with the Project for human health and, consequently, 
a cumulative effects assessment was not warranted for this element. In addition, residual effects associated 
with employment and economy were not assessed in the cumulative effects assessment since they were 
considered positive. 

The cumulative effects assessment considered the worst-case scenario for the particular element in 
question. The worst-case scenario was determined to be more than one reasonably foreseeable 
development being constructed within the same season. No additional mitigation measures were deemed 
warranted in addition to those presented in Section 6.2. 

 
   

Page 7-78 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Accidental events, such as a pipeline rupture, were considered to have a low probability of occurrence and, 
therefore, they were not assessed for cumulative effects. The Contingency Plans prepared for the Project 
will be implemented to respond in the unlikely event of an accident, as well as contain and clean-up these 
incidents. 

The ESA for the Project concludes that there are no situations where there is a high probability of 
occurrence of a permanent or long-term cumulative residual environmental effect of high magnitude that 
cannot be technically or economically mitigated, with the exception of woodland caribou. NGTL will develop 
and implement a Caribou Mitigation Plan, which will be provided to the AESRD and is expected to reduce 
the Project’s contribution to cumulative effects on caribou.  

The cumulative effects on the environmental and socio-economic elements within the RSAs for various 
elements were considered to be not significant. 

 

 
   

Page 7-79 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
8.0 ENVIRONMENTAL COMPLIANCE STRATEGY 
TransCanada’s Health, Safety and Environment (HS&E) Commitment Statement applies to all phases of 
NGTL's work (Figure 8.1). NGTL is committed to the implementation of the spirit and intent of the policy in 
regard to the Project. NGTL representatives and Contractors are required to comply with the policy as a 
condition of their employment and the policy applies to all aspects of the Project. Along with this 
commitment, NGTL has agreed to follow the mitigation measures presented in the EPP and the 
Environmental Alignment Sheets to reduce the potential for adverse environmental effects associated with 
the Project. 

8.1 Environmental Protection Plan 

In order to achieve the overall objective of avoiding or reducing environmental effects and to ensure 
compliance with the mitigation described in Section 6.0, site-specific environmental mitigation measures 
have been developed that are presented in the EPP (Appendix 1) and have been mapped on the 
Environmental Alignment Sheets (Appendix 2). The EPP has been written in construction specification 
format so that it can be easily interpreted and followed in the field, as well as to facilitate inclusion in the 
construction contract bid documents and specifications. Should any conflict in the construction contract and 
the EPP arise, the more stringent conditions will apply. Workers who show careless or wanton neglect of 
the environment or disregard the mitigation measures outlined in the EPP will be removed from the work 
site. 

The EPP and the accompanying Environmental Alignment Sheets are a compilation of all the background 
environmental work (e.g., effects assessment, supporting studies - Appendices 3 through 10) and public 
engagement program associated with the Project. Therefore, in addition to the EPP and the Environmental 
Alignment Sheets, applicable supporting documentation will be accessible in the construction field office. 

8.2 Environmental Orientation 

NGTL will conduct an environmental orientation with key Contractor supervisory personnel and NGTL’s 
Pipeline Inspectors at a meeting prior to construction. All key construction and inspection staff will be briefed 
on NGTL’s expectations, key environmental issues and corresponding mitigation measures. In addition, the 
lead Environmental Inspector will be tasked with proactively communicating environmental objectives and 
potential items of concern with the entire construction team through weekly meetings and other 
correspondence, as required. 

8.3 Environmental Inspection 

NGTL will retain the services of an Environmental Inspector(s) during all critical phases of construction of 
the Project. The Environmental Inspector(s) will be familiar with pipeline and facility construction in a 
forested setting as well as with the potential effects and mitigation available to avoid or reduce these 
construction effects. The Environmental Inspector(s) will be responsible to promote and monitor continuous 
and consistent compliance with this ESA, as well as all permit/approval conditions, environmental laws and 
guidelines and other environmental commitments. The Environmental Inspector(s) will report directly to the 
NGTL Construction Manager and indirectly to the NGTL Environmental Advisor, and be recognized as an 
integral part of the construction management team. The NGTL Environmental Advisor will be available to 
the Environmental Inspector(s) for decision-making support and resolution of environmental resource 
issues arising on-site. 

The Environmental Inspector(s) will monitor construction and prepare reports of activities and conditions. 
The environmental issues identified in Section 6.0 and the implementation of the mitigation measures in 
the EPP will be carefully monitored by the Environmental Inspector(s). If the mitigation measures are not 
found to be effective, the Environmental Inspector(s) will consult either the Construction Manager or NGTL's 
Environmental Advisor. The Environmental Inspector(s) will also be responsible for enforcing compliance 
with environmental commitments, approvals and permits, recommending additional or alternative mitigation 
measures, noting potentially adverse environmental effects, identifying site-specific issues and determining 
the status of environmental issues following construction of the Project.  

 
   

Page 8-1 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
The Environmental Inspector(s) will have the authority to modify or suspend construction activity at a 
particular site if a problem has been detected. The Environmental Inspector(s) will be responsible for 
making recommendations with regard to environmental shut-down (e.g., wet/thawed soil conditions). 

Following completion of construction, the Environmental Inspector(s) will work with NGTL's Environmental 
Advisor in the preparation of the initial post-construction report, making use of daily reports, photos and 
records of government liaison. This report will include a description of the construction program and 
mitigation measures employed, as well as the identification of the status of outstanding environmental 
issues. 

8.4 Issue Monitoring 

NGTL will strive to carry out the Project in an environmentally responsible manner through the assessment 
of environmental issues, the planning and implementation of mitigation measures and contingency plans 
to address those issues, and the establishment of compliance initiatives such as environmental orientation 
and environmental inspection. 

If an unforeseen environmental issue arises during construction for which no mitigation measures have 
been approved, the Environmental Inspector(s) will formulate a plan-of-action in consultation with NGTL 
staff and the applicable government agencies. The plan-of-action will include measures to assess, and 
avoid or mitigate the environmental effect. 

  

 
   

Page 8-2 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Figure 8.1 Health, Safety and Environment Commitment Statement  
 

 

 

 
   

Page 8-3 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 

9.0 POST-CONSTRUCTION MONITORING 
The PCM Program will include an assessment of reclamation, revegetation, erosion control and any weed 
problem areas along the construction right-of-way. The PCM Program will also take into consideration 
recommendations made and any unresolved issues identified in the initial post-construction report.  

The purpose of the PCM Program will be to: 

• evaluate the recovery of the areas disturbed during construction; 

• identify environmental issues that may have arisen post-construction; and 

• recommend and coordinate the implementation of any remedial measures that are 
warranted and additional special measures to address any outstanding or new 
environmental issues. 

NGTL will conduct PCM Programs during the first, third and fifth complete growing seasons following 
construction and post-construction reclamation measures. Unless otherwise directed by the NEB, the PCM 
Program will commence during the first full growing season after construction clean-up (i.e., mid to late 
summer 2017). By initiating the program in year one, issues identified and remedial actions taken during 
the first year can be assessed and any residual outstanding issues can be managed during the subsequent 
year. Preliminary work will entail a review of relevant planning, construction and environmental reports as 
well as any other documentation of potential issues encountered during construction to create an 
Environmental Issues List. The Environmental Issues List will form the basis for monitoring issues identified 
during the construction and reclamation phases of the Project.  

It is anticipated that preliminary work will be followed by an aerial reconnaissance in late summer 2016 to 
compile a punch list for the final clean-up which is anticipated to occur during winter 2016/2017. This work 
will be conducted to note any areas where erosion, slope/bank instability, disruption of natural drainage or 
excessive trench subsidence is evident. The first-year PCM Program will then be initiated in late 
summer 2017 to inspect any locations where problems were noted during the aerial reconnaissance. During 
the ground reconnaissance, NGTL will inspect the conditions of the right-of-way to assess the effects of 
pipeline construction and the effectiveness of mitigation, reclamation and revegetation measures. The right-
of-way will also be monitored to determine if there is any disturbance of natural drainage patterns. The 
trench and areas of potential terrain instability will be monitored during aerial pipeline patrol during spring 
breakup after construction and for at least 2 years following construction. Mitigation measures will be 
implemented as soon as feasible after an issue is identified during the aerial pipeline patrol and the 
Environmental Issues List will be used to monitor the success of mitigation measures taken to address the 
issues identified. 

PCM reports will be completed following each year of monitoring. The PCM reports will document all 
environmental issues identified during the inspections and any follow-up assessments, and will also track 
mitigation effectiveness. Issues that have been successfully mitigated will be listed as resolved. The reports 
will also identify any locations with unresolved environmental issues and the mitigation activities scheduled 
by NGTL to resolve those issues. The first year PCM report will also include the environmental as-built 
report. 

NGTL will continue to monitor the right-of-way as needed during operations to ensure any issues related to 
weeds, trench subsidence, water retention, slope or bank erosion, and water erosion of soil are identified 
and that mitigation measures are implemented on a timely basis. Routine monitoring by NGTL personnel 
will be continuous for the life of the Project. 

Methods for monitoring the status of environmental effects of the Project will be based on the principle that 
success of land reclamation is measured against adjacent representative site conditions while taking into 
consideration the status of reclamation at the time of the assessment. Reclamation monitoring involves an 
assessment of the final clean-up along the construction right-of-way, which includes: grade restoration; 
upper surface material replacement; seeding; drainage restoration; debris removal; trench settlement; slope 
stability; and any other special measures required for the Project, such as access control. Revegetation 
 

   
Page 9-1 

 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
monitoring involves an assessment of the re-establishment of vegetation and success of revegetation, as 
well as the identification of any weed infestations along the construction right-of-way. Erosion monitoring 
involves an assessment of the effect of wind and water along the construction right-of-way, as well as the 
assessment of effectiveness of any erosion control measures implemented during construction. 

9.1.1 Inspection 

Site inspections will be completed along the pipeline construction right-of-way and the compressor station 
location during the PCM Program. Additional expertise will be sought to assess other issues that may arise, 
if necessary. The appropriate specialists will recommend and oversee the implementation of any remedial 
measures and conduct follow-up site inspections. 

At locations where issues are obvious, such as excessive settlement of the trench crown or water erosion 
on a slope, the extent of the problem area will be delineated and the area will be scheduled for repair. Soil 
and/or vegetation sampling will be conducted, if warranted, at locations where poor revegetation is evident 
in order to determine the cause (e.g., weeds and/or compaction) and magnitude of the problem, and assist 
in the identification of appropriate remedial measures or continue to monitor rather than implement remedial 
measures.  

9.1.2 Vegetation Monitoring 

The pipeline right-of-way will be visually inspected by personnel with experience completing PCM following 
construction and implementation of post-construction reclamation measures for vegetation issues, such as 
weed infestations or poor vegetation establishment. Particular attention will be given to areas of terrain 
instability that may be prone to erosion. If warranted, detailed vegetation assessments will be completed at 
sites where reclamation problems are identified.  

The compressor station location will be fenced and gravelled following construction and clean-up activities; 
therefore, vegetation monitoring at this location is not warranted.  

TERA recommends that PCM be conducted for all occurrences of rare plant, lichen and moss populations 
impacted by the Project, at a biologically-appropriate time for the species being monitored, 1 year following 
the completion of construction and clean-up activities. 

9.1.3 Watercourse Monitoring 

Areas of potential terrain instability will be monitored for two years following construction and slopes will be 
inspected for slope stability on a routine basis for the life of the pipeline.  

9.1.4 Wetland Monitoring 

Project mitigation is planned during construction to allow affected wetlands to return to the same functional 
conditions as documented during the baseline assessment. Wetland function monitoring is planned to occur 
during subsequent years to document the functional recovery of wetlands and, if warranted, identify areas 
where remedial measures to assist with recovery may be implemented. If the PCM Program determines 
that wetland recovery has not been effectively achieved and there appears to be some loss of wetland 
function, then NGTL will consult with Environment Canada regarding the appropriate next steps. 

9.1.5 Criteria for Success 

The criteria used to determine the effectiveness of the proposed mitigation measures will consist of an 
assessment of the topographic condition of the Project Footprint to ensure that the surface drainage, profile 
and stability of the reclaimed rights-of-way are consistent with the pre-construction patterns, directions and 
capacity of the surrounding landscape.  

Vegetation on the reclaimed right-of-way will be visually compared to similar vegetation communities on 
undisturbed land adjacent to the pipeline right-of-way. Soil exposure, visible erosion, species type and weed 
densities will all be considered during the vegetation assessment. Where vegetation shows signs of stress 
and/or poor growth, surface soils will be assessed to ensure replacement depth, compaction and soil 
structure are comparable to that of control sites off right-of-way.  
 

   
Page 9-2 

 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
The condition of disturbed portions of wetlands will be compared to the results from the pre-construction 
baseline data as well as the condition of the wetland located adjacent to the pipeline right-of-way. Criteria 
assessed will include a comparison of grade, substrate composition, surface water presence/absence, 
water quality and hydrophytic vegetation re-establishment to conditions observed during the baseline 
assessment and those evident off right-of-way.  

Where no known or visible limitations to normal management, access management, soil productivity and 
ecosystem function are evident during the assessment, mitigation measures and reclamation techniques 
will be determined to be successful and the environmental issue considered resolved.  

9.1.6 Selection of Remedial Measures 

In the event that the PCM Program identifies a location where the mitigation measures were unsuccessful 
in avoiding or reducing impacts (e.g., excessive weed growth, excessive trench crown height in wetlands), 
the site will be assessed during the course of the PCM Program. The remedial measure(s) chosen will be 
influenced by the severity of the issue, aerial extent and location of the effect where mitigation was 
ineffective and likely causes that may have resulted or contributed to the ineffective mitigation. Based on 
the evaluation, a determination will be made whether to continue monitoring (e.g., at locations where poor 
revegetation is evident but droughty conditions have occurred) or to immediately implement remedial 
measures (e.g., re-establish wetland contour to pre-construction conditions). Where appropriate, mitigation 
or contingency measures forming part of the EPP will be used to remediate a site. In the unlikely event that 
issues arise that are not addressed in the EPP or existing regulatory guidelines/standards, then remedial 
measures will be discussed with the appropriate regulatory agencies. 

9.1.7 Government Agency Consultation 

NGTL and/or its consultants will initiate a post-construction dialogue with government agency 
representatives for Crown land (e.g., AESRD) along the Project Footprint after construction clean-up to 
discuss reclamation progress to date and address and/or resolve any issues, as warranted. NGTL has an 
ongoing Public Awareness Program with stakeholders. Any future construction-related issues that are 
raised during ongoing operation of the Project will be addressed by NGTL. 

9.1.8 Operation and Maintenance Activities 

Following the PCM Program, routine monitoring by NGTL representatives will be continuous for the life of 
the Project through routine operation and maintenance activities (e.g., monitoring the pipeline right-of-way 
for issues related to trench subsidence, water retention, slope or bank erosion), so that issues are identified 
early and mitigation measures implemented in a timely fashion.    

9.1.9 Documentation and Reporting 

The PCM Program will document, using an Environmental Issues List, all environmental issues identified 
for the Project. Issues that have been successfully mitigated will be listed as resolved. The Environmental 
Issues List will also identify any locations with unresolved environmental issues and the mitigation activities 
planned by NGTL to resolve these issues. 

An annual PCM report will identify any problems that arose due to the ineffectiveness of the mitigation 
measures employed during pipeline construction. Any remedial measures implemented will be 
documented. 

 

 
   

Page 9-3 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
10.0 CONCLUSION 
This ESA for the proposed Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and the Leismer East 
Compressor Station Project concludes that there are no situations where there is a high probability of 
occurrence of a permanent or long-term residual environmental effect of high magnitude that cannot be 
technically or economically mitigated, with the exception of woodland caribou. In addition, there are no 
situations with regard to socio-economic elements that meet the criteria of a significant residual 
socio-economic effect, as defined in Section 6.1. With the exception of woodland caribou and the 
subsequent traditional use related to woodland caribou, the residual environmental effects and concerns 
identified by stakeholders are not extraordinary, and the potential effects arising from construction of the 
pipeline and compressor station can be readily mitigated by standard environmental protection measures. 
Consequently, the identified residual effects of construction and operations associated with the Project will 
be not significant for all elements except woodland caribou, which was assessed as having a significant 
residual effect. 

The Project may act cumulatively with existing activities and reasonably foreseeable developments in the 
vicinity of the Project. The ESA for the Project concludes that there are no situations where there is a high 
probability of occurrence of a permanent or long-term cumulative residual environmental effect of high 
magnitude that cannot be technically or economically mitigated, with the exception of woodland caribou. In 
addition, there are no situations with regard to socio-economic elements that meet the criteria of a 
significant cumulative residual socio-economic effect. Consequently, cumulative residual effects associated 
with the Project are considered not significant for all elements except woodland caribou, which was 
assessed as having a significant cumulative effect. 

Additional mitigation will be developed, where warranted, on a site-specific basis to address the Project’s 
incremental contribution to cumulative adverse effects on woodland caribou. NGTL is committed to 
continuing consultation with federal and provincial regulators to develop and implement appropriate 
mitigation to avoid and minimize Project effects on woodland caribou. 

Mitigation measures have been developed to further reduce the severity of potential environmental and 
socio-economic residual effects where a negative impact balance was identified. The proposed mitigation 
measures form the basis of the EPP for the Project (see Appendix 1) and accompanying Environmental 
Alignment Sheets (see Appendix 2), which identify where specific measures are to be implemented. 
Contingency plans have been developed in the event that site-specific environmental concerns are 
identified during the course of supplemental studies or during construction (see Appendix 1 of the ESA). 
The implementation of the proposed mitigation measures will greatly reduce the severity of the 
environmental and socio-economic residual effects associated with the construction and operations of the 
Project. 

 

 
   

Page 10-1 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
11.0 REFERENCES 
11.1 Personal Communications 

TERA wishes to acknowledge those people identified in the Personal Communications for their assistance 
in supplying information and comments incorporated into this report. 

Beniuk, K. Agricultural Fieldman. Lac La Biche County, AB. 

Björk, C. Research Associate, University of British Columbia Herbarium. Vancouver, BC. 

Brick, M. Administrative Manager, Alberta Professional Outfitters Society. Edmonton, AB. 

Clayton, T. Senior Fisheries Biologist, serving the Lethbridge area. Fish and Wildlife Division of Alberta 
Sustainable Resource Development. Lethbridge, AB. 

Goward, T. Curator of Lichens, University of British Columbia Herbarium. Vancouver, BC. 

Gregoire, P. Senior Environmental Assessment Officer, Environment Canada. Edmonton, AB. 

Stone, L. Environmental Technologist, R. M. of Wood Buffalo. Fort McMurray, AB. 

11.2 Literature Cited 

Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada. 2013. First Nation Profiles. Website: http://pse5-
esd5.ainc-inac.gc.ca/fnp/Main/Index.aspx?lang=eng. Accessed June 2014. 

Adams, B.W., G. Ehlert, C. Stone, M. Alexander, D. Lawrence, M. Willoughby, D. Moisey, C. Hincz and A. 
Burkinshaw. 2009. Range Health Assessment for Grassland, Forest and Tame Pasture. Pub. No. 
T/044. Revised April 2009. Government of Alberta Sustainable Resource Development, Lands 
Division, Rangeland Management Branch. Edmonton, AB. 152 pp. 

Adamus, P. 2011. Manual for the Wetland Ecosystem Services Protocol for the United States. Website: 
www.oregonstate.edu/~adamusp/WESPUS. Accessed: March 2013. 

Alberta Agriculture and Rural Development. 2013. Map of Irrigation Districts in Alberta. 

Alberta Biodiversity Monitoring Institute. 2010a. ABMI Human Footprint Map - Lower Peace (2010 
Version 1.1) (digital file). Edmonton, AB. Available: http://www.abmi.ca. Acquired: 
December 2012. Last Update Check: June 13, 2014.  

Alberta Biodiversity Monitoring Institute. 2010b. ABMI Human Footprint Map - Lower Athabasca (2010 
Version 1.1) (digital file). Edmonton, AB. Available: http://www.abmi.ca. Acquired: January 2013. 
Last Update Check: June 13, 2014. 

Alberta Conservation Information Management System. 2013. Element Occurrences (Part 1: Non 
Sensitive). November 2012. Government of Alberta Tourism, Parks and Recreation. Edmonton, 
AB. Available: http://tpr.alberta.ca/parks/heritageinfocentre/datarequests/default.aspx. Acquired: 
November 2012. Last Update Check: June 18, 2013. 

Alberta Energy and Resources Conservation Board. 2007. Directive 038: Noise Control. Prepared by the 
Alberta Energy and Utility Board. Calgary, AB. 53 pp. 

Alberta Energy Regulator 2014 Integrated Application Registry. Website: 
https://www3.eub.gov.ab.ca/eub/dds/iar_query/FindApplications.aspx. Accessed: May 2014.  

Alberta Energy Regulator/Alberta Geological Survey. 2009. Locations of Alberta Springs (digital file). 
Edmonton, AB. Available: http://www.ags.gov.ab.ca/publications/abstracts/DIG_2009_0002.html. 
Acquired: October 2009. Last Update Check: November 12, 2013. 

 
   

Page 11-1 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Alberta Energy. 2014a. Geographic Land Information Management and Planning System search via the 

Electronic Transfer System. Website: http://www.energy.alberta.ca/includes/1076.asp. Accessed: 
May 2014. 

Alberta Energy. 2014b. Coal Activity Map. Website: 
http://www.energy.gov.ab.ca/xdata/mapProducts/coal.pdf. Accessed: April 2014. 

Alberta Enterprise and Advanced Education 2014. Inventory of Major Alberta Projects. Website: 
https://www.albertacanada.com/business/statistics/inventory-of-major-projects.aspx. Accessed: 
May 2014. 

Alberta Environment and Sustainable Resource Development. 2012a. Mountain Pine Beetle Management 
Zones 2012-2013. Alberta Sustainable Resource Development. Edmonton, AB. Website: 
http://mpb.alberta.ca/Resources/documents/MPB-Zones2012-2013.pdf. Accessed: May 2014. 

Alberta Environment and Sustainable Resource Development. 2012b. Species Assessed by Alberta's 
Endangered Species Conservation Committee: Short List. Updated November 6, 2012. 2 pp. 

Alberta Environment and Sustainable Resource Development. 2013b. Code of Practice for Pipelines and 
Telecommunication Lines Crossing a Water Body. Includes Amendments to June 2013. 36 pp. 

Alberta Environment and Sustainable Resource Development. 2013c. Code of Practice for Watercourse 
Crossings: Water Act - Water (Ministerial) Regulation. Includes Amendments to June 2013. 
44 pp. 

Alberta Environment and Sustainable Resource Development. 2013d. Forest Management Agreement 
Boundaries. December 2011. Website: 
http://www.srd.alberta.ca/LandsForests/ForestManagement/ForestManagementAgreements/docu
ments/FMABoundariesMap-Nov2011.pdf. Accessed: April 2014. 

Alberta Environment and Sustainable Resource Development. 2013e. AlPac Forest Products 
Incorporated Annual Allowable Cut Tables Consolidation. Website: http://esrd.alberta.ca/lands-
forests/forest-management/forest-management-plans/documents/AlPacForestProducts/Alpac-
AllowableCutTable-Jun11-2013.pdf. Accessed: April 2014. 

Alberta Environment and Sustainable Resource Development. 2013e. Alberta Ambient Air Quality 
Alberta Environment and Sustainable Resource Development. 2014b. Flood Hazard Map Application. 

Website: http://www.envinfo.gov.ab.ca/FloodHazard/. Accessed: May 2014. 

Alberta Environment and Sustainable Resource Development. 2014c. Surface Water Quality Program. 
Website: http://esrd.alberta.ca/water/programs-and-services/surface-water-quality-
program/default.aspx. Accessed: June 2014.  

Alberta Environment and Sustainable Resource Development. 2014d. Alberta Water Well Information 
Database(digital file). Edmonton, AB. Available: via ftp site, contact gwinfo@gov.ab.ca for 
access. Acquired: February 2014. Last Update Check: February 3, 2014.  

Alberta Environment and Sustainable Resource Development. 2014e. Specified Gas Reporting Standard 
Version 8. Edmonton, AB. 

Alberta Environment and Sustainable Resource Development. 2014f. Fisheries and Wildlife Management 
Information System Records. Received from AESRD Edmonton Office (Lonnie Bilyk). 
June 4, 2014. 

Alberta Environment and Sustainable Resource Development. 2014g. Wildlife Management Units. 
Website: http://esrd.alberta.ca/fish-wildlife/fishing-hunting-trapping/hunting-alberta/wildlife-
management-units.aspx. Accessed: May 2014.  

 
   

Page 11-2 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Alberta Environment and Sustainable Resource Development. 2014h. Wildfire Operations. Website: 

http://esrd.alberta.ca/wildfire/wildfire-operations/default.aspx. Accessed: April 2014. 

Alberta Environment and Sustainable Resource Development. 2014i. Alberta Wildfire Perimeters: 1931 to 
2013(digital file). Edmonton, AB. Available: http://esrd.alberta.ca/wildfire/wildfire-maps/historical-
wildfire-information/spatial-wildfire-data.aspx. Acquired: April 30, 2014. Update Interval: Annually. 

Alberta Environment. 1988. Environmental Handbook for Pipeline Construction. Edmonton, AB. 90 pp.  

Alberta Environment. 1994a. Guide for Pipelines Pursuant to the Environmental Protection and 
Enhancement Act and Regulations (currently under revision). March 1994. Website: 
http://www.environment.gov.ab.ca/info/library/6864.pdf. Accessed: February 2014. 

Alberta Environment. 1994b. Environmental Protection Guidelines for Pipelines. Conservation and 
Reclamation Information Letter, C&R/IL/94-5. July 1994. Website: 
http://environment.gov.ab.ca/info/library/6830.pdf. Accessed: February 2014. 

Alberta Environment. 1995. Draft Manual on Soil Conservation and Pipeline Construction. Based on a 
report prepared by TERA Environmental Consultants (Alta). Ltd. and Pedology Consultants. Land 
Reclamation Division. Website: http://environment.gov.ab.ca/info/library/6857.pdf. Accessed: 
February 2014. 

Alberta Environment. 1998. Voluntary Shutdown Criteria for Construction Activities or Operations. 
Conservation and Reclamation Information Letter, C&R/IL/98-4. March 1998. Website: 
http://environment.gov.ab.ca/info/library/6884.pdf. Accessed: March 2014. 

Alberta Environment. 1999. Surface Water Quality Guidelines for Use in Alberta. 20 pp. 

 Alberta Environment. 2000a. Guide to the Code of Practice for Pipelines and Telecommunication Lines, 
Including Guidelines for Complying with the Code of practice. Revised April 2001. Government of 
Alberta. 16 pp. 

Alberta Environment. 2000a. Guide to the Code of Practice for Watercourse Crossings, Including 
Guidelines for Complying with the Code of Practice. Revised April 2001. Government of Alberta. 
29 pp.  

Alberta Environment. 2000b. Guide to the Code of Practice for Pipeline and Telecommunication Lines, 
Including Guidelines for Complying with the Code of Practice. Revised April 2001. Government of 
Alberta. 16 pp.  

Alberta Environment. 2008. Alberta’s 2008 Climate Change Strategy. Responsibility / Leadership / Action. 
January 2008. Website: http://environment.alberta.ca/01757.html. Accessed: July 2014. 

Alberta Environment. 2010a. Focus on Groundwater: Groundwater Basics. Edmonton, AB. 4pp. 

Alberta Environment. 2010b. Focus on Groundwater: Groundwater Quality and Quantity. Edmonton, AB. 
3 pp. 

Alberta Geological Survey. 2013a. Bedrock Geology of Alberta – Map 600. 1:1 000 000 online map. 
Available: http://www.ags.gov.ab.ca/publications/abstracts/MAP_600.html. Accessed: May 2014.  

Alberta Health Services. 2014. Home. Website: http://www.health.alberta.ca/. Accessed: April 2014.  

Alberta Ministry of Transportation. 2014c. Highway 63 Twinning Project. Available at 
http://www.transportation.alberta.ca/4942.htm. Accessed on June 23, 2014 

Alberta Ministry of Transportation. 2014c. Highway 63 Twinning Project. Available at 
http://www.transportation.alberta.ca/4942.htm. Accessed on June 23, 2014. 

 
   

Page 11-3 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Alberta Parks. 2014. Crow Lake Provincial Park. Website: http://albertaparks.ca/crow-lake-pp.aspx. 

Accessed: April 2014.  

Alberta Pipeline Environmental Steering Committee. 1996. Guidelines for Alternate Soil Handling 
Procedures During Pipeline Construction. Prepared for Soil Handling Sub-Committee of the 
APESC. Prepared by W.W. Pettapiece and M.W. Dell. June, 1996. 

Alberta Sustainable Resource Development and Alberta Conservation Association. 2010. Status of the 
Woodland Caribou (Rangifer tarandus caribou) in Alberta: Update 2010. Alberta Sustainable 
Resource Development. Wildlife Status Report No. 30. Edmonton, AB. 88 pp. 

Alberta Sustainable Resource Development. 2005. Status of the Arctic Grayling (Thymallus arcticus) in 
Alberta. Alberta Sustainable Resource Development, Fish and Wildlife Division, and Alberta 
Conservation Association, Wildlife Status Report No. 57, Edmonton, AB. 41 pp. 

Alberta Sustainable Resource Development. 2007. Mountain Pine Beetle Management Strategy. Alberta 
Sustainable Resource Development. Edmonton, AB. 20 pp. Website: 
http://mpb.alberta.ca/AlbertasStrategy/documents/MPB_man_strategy.pdf. Accessed: May 2014. 

Alberta Sustainable Resource Development. 2010. The General Status of Alberta Wild Species. Fish and 
Wildlife Division. Edmonton, AB. 242 pp. 

Alberta Sustainable Resource Development. 2011a. Definitions of General Status Categories. General 
Status of Alberta Wildlife Species. Edmonton, AB. 1 pp. 

Alberta Sustainable Resource Development. 2011b. Mountain Pine Beetle Log Management Directive 
2011-04. April 15, 2011. Alberta Sustainable Resource Development. Edmonton, AB. 5 pp. 
Website: http://esrd.alberta.ca/forms-maps-services/directives/documents/2011-04-
MountainPineBeetle-LogManagement-Apr2011.pdf. Accessed: May 2014. 

Alberta Sustainable Resource Development. 2011c. General Status of Alberta Wild Species 2010. 
Website: http://esrd.alberta.ca/fish-wildlife/species-at-risk/wild-species-status-search.aspx. 
Accessed: May 2014. 

Alberta Tourism, Parks and Recreation. 2009. Environmentally Significant Areas of Alberta. 1:1,000,000 
map. Parks Division. 

Alberta Tourism, Parks and Recreation. 2013. Parks and Protected Areas (including Crown 
Reservations). 1:1,000,000 map. Parks Division.  

Alberta Transportation 2014b. 2011-2014 Tentative Major Construction Projects.  Website: 
http://www.transportation.alberta.ca/Content/docType181/production/Provincial%20Highways%20
2011-2014.pdf.  Accessed: May 2014. 

Alberta Transportation. 2013. Traffic Volumes History 2003 to 2012. Website: 
http://www.transportation.alberta.ca/Content/docType181/production/HISTORY%202003-
2012.pdf. Accessed: April 2014.  

Alberta Transportation. 2014a. Automated Traffic Recorder Monthly Volume Report 2013. Website: 
http://www.transportation.alberta.ca/Content/docType181/production/ATR%20Monthly%20Volum
e%20Report%202013.pdf. Accessed: May 2014. 

Alberta Utilities Commission 2014. Applications Search.  Web site: 
https://www.auc.ab.ca/eub/dds/iar_query/FindApplications.aspx.  Accessed: May 2014 

Alberta Watershed Council. 2012. Athabasca Watershed Council. Website: http://www.awc-
wpac.ca/content/about-us. Accessed: May 2014. 

Alberta-Pacific Forest Industries Inc. 2013. Access Development Plan 

 
   

Page 11-4 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
AltaLink 2014. Website: http://www.altalink.ca/. Accessed: May 2014. 

AltaLIS 2008. AltaLIS. 2008. Alberta Forest Recreation Areas (digital file). Calgary, AB. Available: 
http://www.altalis.com/prod_base_bound.html. Acquired: June 2008. Last Update Check: 
May 25, 2012. 

AltaLIS. 2011a. BF Railway (digital file). Calgary, AB. Available: http://www.altalis.com. Last Update Date: 
May 24, 2011  Accessed: June, 2014. 

AltaLIS. 2011b. Access Polygons (digital file). Calgary, AB. Available: http://www.altalis.com. Last Update 
Date: May 24, 2011 Accessed: June, 2014. 

AltaLIS. 2011c. BF Road ARC (digital file). Calgary, AB. Available: http://www.altalis.com. Last Update 
Date: May 24, 2011 Accessed: June, 2014. 

AltaLIS. 2011e. BF PUBLND REC AREA POLYGON (digital file). Calgary, AB. Available: 
http://www.altalis.com. Last Update Date: May 24, 2011 Accessed: June, 2014. 

AltaLIS. 2011f. BF POWERLINE ARC (digital file). Calgary, AB. Available: http://www.altalis.com. Last 
Update Date: May 24, 2011 Accessed: June, 2014. 

AltaLIS. 2011g. BF CUT TRAIL ARC (digital file). Calgary, AB. Available: http://www.altalis.com. Last 
Update Date: May 24, 2011 Accessed: June, 2014. 

Ambrose, N., G. Ehlert, K. Spicer-Rawe. 2009. Riparian Health Assessment for Lakes, Sloughs and 
Wetlands – Field Workbook. Second Edition. Modified from Fitch, L., B. W. Adams and G. Hale. 
2001. Riparian Health Assessment for Streams and Small Rivers – Field Wordbook. Lethbridge, 
Alberta: Cows and Fish Program. 96 pp. Website: 
http://www.cowsandfish.org/publications/documents/LakesandWetlandsRHAWorkbook2009.pdf. 
Accessed: March 2013. 

Anderson, P.G., B.R. Taylor and G.C. Balch. 1996. Quantifying the Effects of Sediment Release on Fish 
and Their Habitats. Canadian Manuscript Report of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences No. 2346. 
Department of Fisheries and Oceans, Habitat and Enhancement Branch, Vancouver, BC and 
Alberta Area Habitat Management Division, Winnipeg, MB. ix + 90 pp. 

Anderson, R.B. 1999. Peatland habitat use and selection by woodland caribou (Rangifer tarandus 
caribou) in northern Alberta. M.Sc. Thesis. University of Alberta. Edmonton, AB. 

Andrén, H. 1994. Effects of habitat fragmentation on birds and mammals in landscapes with different 
proportions of suitable habitat: a review. Oikos 71: 355-366. 

Anthony, E. and T. Kunz. 1977. Feeding Strategies of the Little Brown Bat, Myotis lucifugus, in Southern 
New Hampshire. Ecology 58:775-786. 

Antoniuk, T. 2000. Cumulative effects assessment of pipeline projects in Cumulative Environmental 
Effects Management Tools and Approaches. Alan J. Kennedy (Ed.). Papers from a symposium 
held by the Alberta Society of Professional Biologists. Pp. 143-161. Calgary, Alberta. 

Antoniuk, T. 2002. Cumulative effects assessment and linear corridors: The representative areas 
approach. Pp. 209-218 in Environmental Concerns in Rights of Way Management: Seventh 
International Symposium. J.W. Goodrich-Mahoney, D.F. Mutrie and C.A. Guild (Eds.). Elsevier 
Science Ltd 

ATCO Group. 2013a. ATCO Electric – Our Service Area. Website: http://www.atcoelectric.com/About-
Us/Our-Service-Area. Accessed: May 2014. 

ATCO Group. 2013b. ATCO Gas – Our Service Area. Website:  http://www.atcogas.com/Services/Our-
Service-Area/. Accessed: May 2014. 

 
   

Page 11-5 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Athabasca County. 2011. Fire Department Locations. Website: 

http://www.athabascacounty.com/services/protective-services/fire-department-locations/. 
Accessed: May 2014. 

Athabasca Regional Waste Management Services Commission. 2014. Hours of Operation. Website: 
http://www.athabascaregionalwaste.com/uploads/Hours_of_Operation_20121.pdf. Accessed: 
May 2014. 

Athabasca University. 2013. Prospective Students. Website: Accessed: 
http://www.athabascau.ca/prospective/. May 2014. 

AtlaLIS 2012. AltaLIS. 2012. Alberta Forest Management Units (digital file). Calgary, AB. Available: 
http://www.altalis.com/products/base/alberta_boundary_data.html. Acquired: May 2012. Last 
Update Check: May 12, 2014. 

Aviation Strategy Action Group. 2003. Inventory of Alberta Regional and Local Airports. Website: 
http://www.transportation.alberta.ca/Content/docType54/Production/ASAGAssessmentofFacilities
FinalReportFeb0803.pdf. Accessed: April 2014. 

Baisley, S.A. 2012. Effect of drying induced afforestation on peatland ecohydrology: implications for 
wildlife vulnerability. MSc Thesis, McMaster University. Hamilton, Ontario. 

Bayne, E.M., S. Boutin, B. Tracz, and K. Charest. 2005. Functional and numerical responses of ovenbirds 
(Seiurus aurocapilla) to changing seismic exploration practices in Alberta’s boreal forest. 
Ecoscience 12(2): 216-222. 

Belisle, M. and C.C. St. Clair. 2001. Cumulative effects of barriers on the movements of forest birds. 
Conservation Ecology 5(2):9. 

Bergeron, Y., A. Leduc, B.D. Harvey and S. Gauthier. 2002. Natural fire regime: A guide for sustainable 
management of the Canadian boreal forest. SilvaFennica 36(1)81-95. 

Bergerud, A.T., R.D. Jakimchuk and D.R. Carruthers. 1984. The buffalo of the north: caribou (Rangifer 
taradus) and human developments. Arctic 37(1):7-22. 

Berry, D. K. 1998. Alberta's Arctic Grayling Management and Recovery Plan. Alberta Environmental 
Protection, Edmonton, AB. 27 pp.   

Berry, D. K. 1999. Alberta's Northern Pike Management and Recovery Plan. Alberta Environment Natural 
Resources Service, Edmonton, AB. 22 pp. 

Berry, D.K. 1995. Alberta's Walleye Management and Recovery Plan. Alberta Environmental Protection, 
Fisheries and Management Division. Edmonton, AB. vii + 32 pp. 

Bird Studies Canada and Nature Canada. 2012. Important Bird Areas. Website: http://ibacanada.ca/. 
Accessed: May 2014. 

Bird, B.L., L.C. Branch and D.L. Miller. 2004. Effects of coastal lighting on foraging behaviour of beach 
mice. Conservation Biology 18(5):1435-1439. 

Birtwell, I. K. 1999. The Effects of Sediment on Fish and Their Habitat. Fisheries and Oceans Canada, 
Science Branch. Vancouver, BC. 34 pp. 

Borden, C.E. and W. Duff. 1952. “A Uniform Site Designation Scheme for Canada” Anthropology in British 
Columbia 3:44-48.  

Borneuf, D. 1983. Springs of Alberta. Earth Sciences Report 82-3. Alberta Research Council. 
Edmonton, AB. iii + 95 pp. 

 
   

Page 11-6 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Brack, V., and J.O. Whitaker. 2001. Foods of the northern myotis, Myotis septentrionalis, from Missouri 

and Indiana, with notes on foraging. Acta Chiropterologica 3:203–210. 

Bradshaw, C.J.A., D.M. Hebert, A.B. Rippin, and S. Boutin. 1995. Winter peatland habitat selection by 
woodland caribou in northeastern Alberta. Can. J. Zool. 73: 1,567-1,574. 

British Columbia Ministry of Environment. 2010. Science Update for the Boreal Caribou (Rangifer 
tarandus caribou pop. 14) in British Columbia. 54 pp. 

Brown G.S., W.J. Rettie, R.J. Brooks and F.F. Mallory. 2007. Predicting the impacts of forest 
management on woodland caribou habitat suitability in black spruce boreal forest. Forest Ecology 
and Management 245:137-147. 

Brown, W.K., J. Huot, P. Lamothe, S.N. Luttich, M. Pare, G. St. Martin and J.B. Theberge. 1986. The 
distribution and movement patterns of four woodland caribou herds in Quebec and Labrador. 
Rangifer Special Issue 1:43-49. 

Browne, C.L. 2010. Habitat use of the western toad in north-central Alberta and the influence of scale. 
Ph.D. Dissertation. University of Alberta. Edmonton, AB. 245 pp. 

Browne, C.L. and C.A. Paszkowski. 2010. Hibernation sites of western toads (Anaxyrus boreas): 
Characterization and management implications. Herpetological Conservation and Biology 
5(1):49-63. 

Bureau of the Convention on Wetlands. 2014. The Ramsar List: The List of Wetlands of International 
Importance. Website: http://www.ramsar.org/pdf/sitelist.pdf. Accessed: May 2014. 

Caceres, M.C., and R.M.R. Barclay. 2000. Myotis septentionalis. Mammalian Species 634:1-4. 

Campbell, J.E. Farton, M.M., Pawlowlcz, J.G. 2001. Surface Geology of the Pelican Area, Alberta (NTS 
83P) Alberta Energy Regulator Map 251. 1:250 000 online map. Available: 
http://www.ags.gov.ab.ca/publications/abstracts/MAP_251.html. Accessed: May 2014.  

Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers, Canadian Energy Pipeline Association and Canadian Gas 
Association. 2005. Pipeline Associated Watercourse Crossings, 3rd Edition. Prepared by TERA 
Environmental Consultants and Salmo Consulting Inc. Calgary, AB. 

Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers. 1996. Hydrostatic test water management guidelines. 
CAPP Publication #19960014. 175 pp. Prepared TERA Environmental Consultants and CH2M 
Gore and Storrie Ltd. (CH2M Hill). 

Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers. 1999. Environmental operating practices of the upstream 
petroleum industry Alberta operations - Pipelines Volume. 

Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. 2013. Rate My Hospital – Northern Lights Regional Health Centre. 
Website: http://www.cbc.ca/news2/health/features/ratemyhospital/profiles/northern-lights-
regional-health-centre/. Accessed: May 2014. 

Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment. 2002. Canadian Water Quality Guidelines for the 
Protection of Aquatic Life: Total Particulate Matter. In: Canadian Environmental Quality 
Guidelines, 1999, Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment. Winnipeg, MB.  

Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment. 2007. Canadian Water Quality Guidelines for the 
Protection of Aquatic Life: Summary Table. Updated December 2007. In: Canadian 
Environmental Quality Guidelines, 1999, Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment, 
Winnipeg, MB. 

Canadian Encyclopedia 2012. Fort McMurray. Web site: 
http://www.thecanadianencyclopedia.ca/en/article/fort-mcmurray/. Accessed: May 2014. 

 
   

Page 11-7 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Canadian Environmental Assessment Agency. 2003. Incorporating Climate Change Considerations in 

Environmental Assessment: General Guidance for Practitioners. Website: http://www.ceaa-
acee.gc.ca/default.asp?lang=En&n=A41F45C5-1. Accessed: January 2014. 

Canadian Environmental Assessment Agency. 2013a. Addressing the “Need for”, “Purpose of” and 
“Alternative Means” under the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act . Canadian 
Environmental Assessment Agency. Website: https://www.ceaa-
acee.gc.ca/default.asp?lang=En&n=1B095C22-1. Accessed: June 2014. 

Canadian Environmental Assessment Agency. 2013b. Assessing Cumulative Environmental Effects 
Under the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act, 2012. Canadian Environmental Assessment 
Agency. Website: http://www.ceaa-acee.gc.ca/default.asp?lang=En&n=1DA9E048-1. Accessed: 
January 2014. 

Canadian Environmental Assessment Agency. 2014. Environmental Assessment Registry. Website: CEA 
Agency – Environmental Assessment Registry. Accessed: May 2014. 

Canadian Heritage Rivers System. 2011. The Canadian Heritage Rivers System. Website: 
http://www.chrs.ca/en/rivers.php. Accessed: May 2014. 

Canadian Pipeline Environment Committee. 2009. The Life Cycle of Pipeline Watercourse Crossings in 
Canada. 36 pp. 

Canadian Wildlife Service. 2004. Environmental Assessment Best Practice Guide for Wildlife at Risk in 
Canada. Environment Canada. Gatineau, QC. 

Cenovus Energy 2010. Narrows Lake Project. 

Cenovus Energy 2012. Christina Lake Thermal Project Phase H and Easter Expansion, Environmental 
Impact Assessment. 

Cheminfo Services Inc. 2005. Best Practices for the Reduction of Air Emissions from Construction and 
Demolition Activities. Prepared for Environment Canada. Transboundary Issues Branch. 

Collins, W.B. and T.S. Smith. 1991. Effects of wind-hardened snow on foraging by reindeer (Rangifer 
tarandus). Arctic 44(3):217-222. 

Collister, D.M., J.L. Kansas, T. Antoniuk and B.J. Power. 2003. Review and Assessment of Environmental 
Effects Information for Wildlife and Fish Indicators in the Regional Sustainable Development 
Strategy (RSDS) Study Area within the Athabasca Oil Sands Region (AOSR). Wildlife and Fish 
Sub-Group, Cumulative Environmental Management Association. 432 pp. 

Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada. 2001. COSEWIC Assessment and Status 
Report on the Yellow Rail Coturnicops noveboracensis in Canada. Committee on the Status of 
Endangered Wildlife in Canada. Ottawa. vii + 62 pp. 

Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada. 2002. COSEWIC Assessment and Status 
Report on the Western Toad Bufo boreas in Canada. Committee on the Status of Endangered 
Wildlife in Canada. Ottawa. vi + 31 pp. 

Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada. 2003. COSEWIC Assessment and Update 
Status Report on the Wolverine Gulo gulo in Canada. Committee on the Status of Endangered 
Wildlife in Canada. Ottawa. vi + 41 pp. 

Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada. 2006. COSEWIC Assessment and Status 
Report on the Rusty Blackbird Euphagus carolinus in Canada. Committee on the Status of 
Endangered Wildlife in Canada. Ottawa. vi + 28 pp. 

 
   

Page 11-8 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada. 2007a. COSEWIC Assessment and Status 

Report on the Common Nighthawk Chordeiles minor in Canada. Committee on the Status of 
Endangered Wildlife in Canada. Ottawa. vi + 25 pp. 

Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada. 2007b. COSEWIC Assessment and Status 
Report on the Olive-sided Flycatcher Contopus cooperi in Canada. Committee on the Status of 
Endangered Wildlife in Canada. Ottawa. vii + 25 pp. 

Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada. 2008a. COSEWIC Assessment and Status 
Report on the Canada Warbler Wilsonia canadensis in Canada. Committee on the Status of 
Endangered Wildlife in Canada. Ottawa. vi + 35 pp. 

Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada. 2008b. COSEWIC Assessment and Status 
Report on the Short-eared Owl Asio flammeus in Canada. Committee on the Status of 
Endangered Wildlife in Canada. Ottawa, ON. vi + 24 pp.  

Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada. 2009. COSEWIC Assessment and Status 
Report on the Horned Grebe Podiceps auritus, Western population and Magdalen Islands 
population in Canada. Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada. Ottawa, ON. 
Vii + 42 pp.  

Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada. 2011. COSEWIC Assessment and Status 
Report on the Barn Swallow Hirundo rustica in Canada. Ottawa, ON. ix + 37 pp. 

Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada. 2012. COSEWIC Assessment and Status 
Report on the Western Toad Anaxyrus boreas in Canada. Ottawa, ON. xiv + 71 pp. 

Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada. 2014a. Canadian Species at Risk. Website: 
http://www.cosewic.gc.ca/eng/sct5/index_e.cfm. Accessed: May 2014. 

Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada. 2014b. Wildlife Species Search: Database of 
Wildlife Species Assessed by COSEWIC. Website: 
http://www.cosewic.gc.ca/eng/sct1/searchform_e.cfm. Accessed: March 2014. 

Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada. 2014c. The COSEWIC Candidate list. 
Website: http://www.cosewic.gc.ca/eng/sct3/index_e.cfm#p3. Accessed: June 2014.  

Courtois, R. and J.P. Ouellet. 2007. Modelling the impact of moose and wolf management on persistence 
of woodland caribou. Alces 43:13-27. 

Curatolo, J.A. and S.M. Murphy. 1986. The effects of pipelines, roads and traffic on the movements of 
caribou, Rangifer tarandus. Canadian Field-Naturalist 100(2):218-224. 

Davis, T.M. 2000. Ecology of the Western Toad (Bufo boreas) in forested areas on Vancouver Island. 
Forest Renewal BC Research Program Final Report. BC Ministry of Forests, Victoria, BC. 28 pp. 

Department of Fisheries and Oceans Canada. 2014. Projects Near Water. Website: http://www.dfo-
mpo.gc.ca/pnw-ppe/index-eng.html. Accessed: August 2014. 

Department of Fisheries and Oceans. 2013. Measures to Avoid Causing Harm to Fish and Fish Habitat. 
Website: http://www.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/pnw-ppe/measures-mesures/index-eng.html. Accessed: 
March 2014. 

Department of Fisheries and Oceans Canada. 2000. Effects of sediment on fish and their habitat. DFO 
Pacific Region Habitat Status Report 2000/01. 9 pp. 

Department of Fisheries and Oceans. 1995. Freshwater Intake End-of-Pipe Fish Screen Guideline. 
Communications Directorate. Ottawa, ON. iii + 27 pp. 

 
   

Page 11-9 
 
 

http://www.cosewic.gc.ca/eng/sct3/index_e.cfm%23p3


NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Desrochers, A. and S. Hannon. 1997. Gap crossing decisions by forest songbirds during the post-fledging 

period. Conservation Biology 11(5):1204-1210. 

Devon Canada Corp. 2011. 2011 Performance Presentation, Devon NEC Corporation, Jackfish SAGD 
Project. 

Ducks Unlimited Canada. 2013. International Conservation Plan Canadian Conservation Priority Regions. 
http://www.ducks.ca/what-we-do/where-work/. Accessed: July 2013. 

Duinker, P.N. and L.A. Greig. 2006. The impotence of cumulative effects assessment in Canada: 
Ailments and ideas for deployment. Environmental Management 37(2): 153 161. 

Dyer, S.J., J.P. O'Neill, S.M. Wasel and S. Boutin. 2001. Avoidance of industrial development by 
woodland caribou. Journal of Wildlife Management 65(3):531-542. 

Dyer, S.J., J.P. O'Niell, S.M. Wasel and S. Boutin. 2002. Quantifying barrier effects of roads and seismic 
lines on move 

Edmonds, E.J. and M. Bloomfield. 1984. A study of woodland caribou (Rangifer tarandus caribou) in 
west-central Alberta, 1979 to 1983. Alberta Energy and Natural Resources, Fish and Wildlife 
Division, Edmonton, AB. 

Environment Canada. 2010. Water Survey of Canada - Archived Hydrometric Data. Website: 
http://www.wsc.ec.gc.ca/applications/H2O/HydromatD-eng.cfm. Accessed: May 2014. 

Environment Canada. 2011a. Petroleum Industry Activity Guidelines for Wildlife Species at Risk in the 
Prairie and Northern Region. Canadian Wildlife Service, Environment Canada, Prairie and 
Northern Region. Edmonton, AB. 64 pp. 

Environment Canada. 2011b. Scientific assessment to inform the identification of critical habitat for 
woodland caribou (Rangifer tarandus caribou), boreal population, in Canada: 2011 update. 
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. xiv + 102 pp. 

Environment Canada. 2012. Recovery Strategy for the Woodland Caribou (Rangifer tarandus caribou), 
Boreal population, in Canada. Species at Risk Act Recovery Strategy Series. Environment 
Canada, Ottawa, ON. xi + 138 pp. 

Environment Canada. 2013. Map of Environment Canada’s Protected Areas in Alberta. Website: 
http://www.ec.gc.ca/ap-pa/default.asp?lang=En&n=E6CF894E-1. Accessed: May 2014.  

Environment Canada. 2014a. Canadian Climate Normals 1981 - 2010 Station Data. Website: 
http://climate.weather.gc.ca/climate_normals/index_e.html. Accessed: May 2014. 

Environment Canada. 2014b. National Inventory Report 1990-2012. Environment Canada, April 2014. 
Website: 
http://unfccc.int/national_reports/annex_i_ghg_inventories/national_inventories_submissions/item
s/8108.php. Accessed: June 2013. 

Environment Canada. 2014c. Species at Risk Public Registry. Website: 
http://www.sararegistry.gc.ca/species/default_e.cfm. Accessed: May 2014.ments of female 
woodland caribou in northeastern Alberta. Canadian Journal of Zoology 80:839-845. 

Fahrig, L. 1997. Relative effects of habitat loss and fragmentation on population extinction. Journal of 
Wildlife Management 61:603 610. 

Federal Environmental Assessment Review Office. 1994a. The Responsible Authority's Guide to the 
Canadian Environmental Assessment Act. Part II: The Practitioner’s Guide. November 1994. Hull, 
QC. 23 pp. 

 
   

Page 11-10 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Federal Environmental Assessment Review Office. 1994b. A Reference Guide for the Canadian 

Environmental Assessment Act: Addressing Cumulative Environmental Effects. Prepared by the 
Federal Environmental Assessment and Review Office. Hull, QC. 23 pp.  

Federal Environmental Assessment Review Office. 1994c. A Reference Guide for the Canadian 
Environmental Assessment Act: Determining Whether a Project is Likely to Cause Significant 
Environmental Effects. Prepared by the Federal Environmental Assessment and Review Office. 
Hull, QC. 23 pp. 

Federation of Alberta Naturalists. 2007. The Atlas of Breeding Birds of Alberta: A Second Look. 
Federation of Alberta Naturalists. Edmonton, AB. 626 pp. 

Fenton, M.B., and R.M.R. Barclay. 1980. Myotis lucifigus. Mammalian Species 142:1-8. 

Fenton, M.M., Waters, E.J., Pawley, S.M., Atkinson, N., Utting, D.J., McKay, K. 2013. Surficial Geology of 
Albert. Map 601.  

Ferguson, M.A.D. and L.B. Keith. 1982. Influence of Nordic skiing on distribution of moose and elk in Elk 
Island National Park, Alberta. Canadian Field-Naturalist 96(1):69-78. 

Fiera Biological Consulting Ltd. 2009. Environmentally Significant Areas Provincial Update 2009. 
Produced for Alberta Tourism, Parks and Recreation. Edmonton, AB. 

Fiera Biological Consulting Ltd. 2010a. Aquatic Environmentally Significant Areas (AESAs) in Alberta 
(digital file). Information prepared for Alberta Environment and Sustainable Resource. Edmonton, 
AB. Available: http://www.waterforlife.alberta.ca/03325.html. Acquired: July 2013. Last Update 
Check: July 17, 2013. 

Fiera Biological Consulting Ltd. 2010b. Aquatic Environmentally Significant Areas in Alberta. Report 
prepared for Alberta Environment, Edmonton, AB. 66 pp 

Finley, C.G. and R.D. Revel. 2002. Pipeline projects and cumulative effects assessment issues. 
Pp. 219-231 in Environmental Concerns in Rights of Way Management: Seventh International 
Symposium. J.W. Goodrich-Mahoney, D.F. Mutrie and C.A. Guild (Eds.). Elsevier Science Ltd. 

Fisheries and Oceans Canada. 2000. Effects of Sediment on Fish and Their Habitat: DFO Pacific Region, 
Habitat Status Report 2000/01 E. 

Fisheries and Wildlife Management Information System. 2013. Fish and Wildlife Service. Alberta 
Sustainable Resource Development. Internet Mapping Tool. Website: http://esrd.alberta.ca/fish-
wildlife/fwmis/default.aspx. Accessed: November 2013. 

Fitch, L., B.W. Adams and G. Hale. 2001. Riparian Health Assessment for Streams and Small Rivers – 
Field Wordbook. Lethbridge, AB: Cows and Fish Program. 90 pp. 

Flather, C.H. and M. Bevers. 2002. Patchy reaction-diffusion and population abundance: The relative 
importance of habitat amount and arrangement. American Naturalist 159(1):40-56.  

Fleming, W.D. and F.K.A. Schmiegelow. 2002. Response of bird communities to pipeline rights-of-way in 
the boreal forest of Alberta. Pages 431- 437 in The Seventh International Symposium on 
Environmental Concerns in Rights-of-Way Management. Elsevier Science. 

Forman, R.T.T. and S.K. Collinge. 1997. Nature conserved in changing landscapes with and without 
spatial planning. Landscape and Urban Planning 37:129 135. 

Fort McMurray Today 2014. Fort McMurray History. Website: 
http://www.google.ca/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&frm=1&source=web&cd=3&ved=0CCkQFjAC&u
rl=http%3A%2F%2Fnides.bc.ca%2Fassignments%2Fcanadaforests%2FUnit1%2FFortMcMurray.
htm&ei=KSwWVMaNJ5CWyATQhIGoAQ&usg=AFQjCNGDSPHpzhLm7KM804ytJkMP1xDswQ&
bvm=bv.75097201,d.aWw. Accessed: May 2014. 

 
   

Page 11-11 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Gartman, D.K. 1991. Pipeline Construction Techniques to Minimize Wetland Impacts in Wetlands and 

Pipelines: Proceedings of the INGAA Foundation First Annual National Environmental 
Symposium. October. Chadds Ford, Pennsylvania, USA. Pp. 1-24. 

Golder Associates 2011. Cheecham/Kettle River Area Expansion. Website: https://docs.neb-one.gc.ca/ll-
eng/llisapi.dll/fetch/2000/90464/90550/554112/666941/698977/697725/A1Z9F1_-_Cheecham_-
_Kettle_River_Area_Expansion_-
_Sec_58_ESA_Section_4_June_2011.pdf?nodeid=697741&vernum=-2. Accessed: May 2014. 

Government of Alberta. 2011. A Woodland Caribou Policy for Alberta. 2 pp. 

Government of Alberta. 2012a. Lower Athabasca Regional Plan 2012-2022. Government of Alberta, 
Edmonton, AB. ii + 94 pp. 

Government of Alberta. 2012b. Family and Community Support Services. Website: 
http://humanservices.alberta.ca/family-community/14876.html. Accessed: May 2014. 

Government of Alberta. 2013a. Integrated Standards and Guidelines – Enhanced Approval Process. 
December 1, 2013. 84 pp. 

Government of Alberta. 2013b. 2013 Alberta Guide to Hunting Regulations.104 pp.  

Government of Alberta. 2013c. Metis Settlements and First Nations in Alberta Community Profiles. 
Website: http://www.aboriginal.alberta.ca/documents/2012_MetisSettlementProfile.pdf. Accessed: 
June 2014. 

Government of Alberta. 2013d. Regulated Rate Search Tool. Website: http://ucahelps.alberta.ca/search-
tool.aspx. Accessed: April 2014. 

Government of Alberta. 2014a. Alberta Guide to Trapping Regulations. Website: 
http://albertaregulations.ca/trappingregs-pdfs.html. Accessed: May 2014. 

Government of Alberta. 2014b. Alberta Guide to Fishing Regulations. Website: http://esrd.alberta.ca/fish-
wildlife/fishing-hunting-trapping/alberta-regulations/documents/AlbertaFishingRegulations-
2014.pdf. Accessed: May 2014. 

Government of Canada 2014c. Major Project Management Office (MPMO) – MPMO Tracker. Website: 
http://www2.mpmo-bggp.gc.ca/MPTracker/home-accueil.aspx. Accessed: May 2014. 

Government of Canada 2014d. Canada’s Economic Action Plan – Projects Map. Website: 
http://actionplan.gc.ca/eng/map.asp. Accessed: May 2014. 

Government of Canada. 1986. Canada: Wetland Regions. National Atlas of Canada 5th Edition. Map. 
http://atlas.nrcan.gc.ca/site/english/maps/water.html. Accessed: July 2013. 

Government of Canada. 2009. Minor Works and Waters (Navigable Waters Protection Act) Order. 
Website: http://canadagazette.gc.ca/rp-pr/p1/2009/2009-05-09/html/notice-avis-eng.html. 
Accessed: January 2014. 

Habib, L., E.M. Bayne and S. Boutin. 2007. Chronic industrial noise affects pairing success and age 
structure of ovenbirds Seiurus aurcapilla. Journal of Applied Ecology 44:176-184. 

Hanson, A., L. Swanson, D. Ewing, G. Grabas, S. Meyer, L. Ross, M. Watmough and J. Kirkby. 2008. 
Wetland Ecological Functions Assessment: An Overview of Approaches. Canadian Wildlife 
Service Technical Report Series No. 497. Atlantic Region. 59 pp. 

Harper, D.J. and J.T. Quigley. 2000. No Net Loss of Fish Habitat: An Audit of Forest Road Crossings of 
Fish-Bearing Streams in British Columbia, 1996-1999. Canadian Technical Report of Fisheries 
and Aquatic Sciences 2319. Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Habitat and Enhancement Branch. 
Vancouver, BC. vi + 43 pp. 

 
   

Page 11-12 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Harper, W.L., J.M. Cooper, K. Simpson, J. Hamilton, K.A. Dunham and D.S. Eastman. 2001. Guidelines 

for Evaluating, Avoiding and Mitigating Impacts of Major Development Projects on Wildlife in 
British Columbia. Draft dated May 2001. 204 pp. 

Harvest Operations Corp 2014. Blackgold – Oil Sands (Conklin). Website: 
http://www.harvestenergy.ca/careers/current-opportunities/blackgold-career-opportunities/. 
Accessed: May 2014 

Hatfield Consultants. 2011. Athabasca Watershed Council State of the Watershed Report: Phase 1. 
Prepared for Athabasca Watershed Council. Hinton, AB. 

Health Canada, 2004. Canadian Handbook on Impact Assessment: Volume 3. The Multidisciplinary 
Team. A Report of the Federal/Provincial/Territorial Committee on Environmental and 
Occupational Health. Website: http://publications.gc.ca/collections/Collection/H46-2-04-362E.pdf. 
Accessed: December 2012. 

Hebblewhite, M., M. Musiani, N. DeCesare, S. Hazenberg, W. Peters, H. Robinson and B. Weckworth. 
2010. Linear Features, Forestry and Wolf Predation of Caribou and Other Prey in West Central 
Alberta. Final report to the Petroleum Technology Alliance of Canada (PTAC). 84 pp. 

Hegmann, G, R. Eccles and K. Strom. 2002. Practical approach to assessing cumulative effects for 
pipelines. Pp. 245-253 in Environmental Concerns in Rights of Way Management: Seventh 
International Symposium. J.W. Goodrich-Mahoney, D.F. Mutrie and C.A. Guild (Eds.). Elsevier 
Science Ltd 

Hegmann, G., C. Cocklin, R. Creasey, S. Dupuis, A. Kennedy, L. Kingsley, W. Ross, H. Spaling and D. 
Stalker. 1999. Cumulative Effects Assessment Practitioners’ Guide. Prepared by AXYS 
Environmental Consulting Ltd. and the CEA Working Group for the Canadian Environmental 
Assessment Agency. Hull, QC. xii + 119 pp. 

Hein, C.D., S.B. Castleberry and K.V. Miller. 2009. Site-occupancy of bats in relation to forested corridors. 
Forest Ecology and Management 257:1200-1207. 

Hornbeck, G.E. and D.L.J. Moyles. 1995. Ecological aspects of woodland caribou in the Pedigree area of 
northwestern Alberta. Pedigree Caribou Standing Committee. Calgary, AB. 

Hunt, J. 2009. Early Boom, The Details of Fort McMurray’s First Land Rush, Nearly 100 Years Ago. 
Website: http://www.oilsandsreview.com/sample/article.asp?id=109. Accessed: May 2014. 

IHS Inc. 2009. IHS Airfields (digital file). Calgary, AB. Received: via DVD, visit http://www.ihs.comfor more 
info. Acquired: October 2012. Last Update Check: April 21, 2014. 

IHS Inc. 2011. Industrial Polygon Features (digital file). Calgary, AB. Received: via DVD, visit 
http://www.ihs.com for more info. Acquired: April 2012. Last Update Check: April 21, 2014. 

IHS Inc. 2014. IHS Facility Data (digital file). Calgary, AB. Received: via DVD, visit http://www.ihs.comfor 
more info. Acquired: June 23, 2014. Update Interval: Monthly. 

IHS Inc. 2014. IHS Road Segments (digital file). Calgary, AB. Received: via DVD, visit http://www.ihs.com 
for more info. Acquired: June 23, 2014. Update Interval: Monthly. 

IHS Inc. 2014.IHS Inc. 2014. IHS Enhanced Pipeline Data (digital file). Calgary, AB. Received: via DVD, 
visit http://www.ihs.com. Acquired: May 15, 2014. Update Interval: Monthly. 

ISL Engineering and Land Services. 2013. Lac La Biche County Municipal Development Plan. Website: 
http://www.laclabichecounty.com/files/labiche/llbc_mdp_draft_ver_7_1_may_2013_final_web.pdf. 
Accessed: June 2013. 

 
   

Page 11-13 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Jalkotzy, M.G., P.I. Ross, and M.D. Nasserden. 1997. The Effects of Linear Developments on Wildlife: A 

Review of Selected Scientific Literature. Prepared for Canadian Association of Petroleum 
Producers. Arc Wildlife Services Ltd., Calgary. 115 pp. 

James, A.R.C. 1999. Effects of industrial development on the predator-prey relationship between wolves 
and caribou in northeastern Alberta. Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada. 

Jantzen, M. K. 2012. Bats and the landscape: The influence of edge effects and forest cover on bat 
activity. Doctoral dissertation, M.Sc. thesis. University of Western Ontario. London, ON. 

Johnsgard, P.A. 1987. Diving Birds of North America. University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln. 292 pp. 

Johnsgard, P.A. 1988. North American Owls: Biology and Natural History. Smithsonian Institution. 
Washington, DC. 295 pp. 

Joint Pipeline Office. 1999. Evaluation of the Aleyska Pipeline Service Company's Operation of the Trans- 
Alaska Pipeline System. Comprehensive Monitoring Program Report February 1999. 41 pp 

Joynt, A and M. Sullivan. 2003. Fish of Alberta. Lone Pine Publishing, Edmonton, AB. 176 pp. 

Kalcounis-Rüppell, M. C., J.M. Psyllakis and R.M. Brigham. 2005. Tree roost selection by bats: an 
empirical synthesis using meta-analysis. Wildlife Society Bulletin 33(3):1123-1132. 

Kershaw, L. 2009. Alberta Wetland Classification System. Draft Report. Prepared for Alberta 
Environment. Edmonton, AB. January 2009. 

Kuzyk, G.W. 2002. Wolf distribution and movements on caribou ranges in west-central Alberta. 
Department of Renewable Resources Master’s Thesis. University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB. 
125 pp. 

Lac La Biche County. 2014. Home. Website: http://www.laclabichecounty.com/. Accessed: May 2014. 

LaPerriere, A.J. and P.C. Lent. 1977. Caribou feeding sites in relation to snow characteristics in 
northeastern Alaska. Arctic 30:101-108. 

Lausen, C. L. and R. M. R. Barclay. 2006. Winter bat activity in the Canadian prairies. Canadian Journal 
of Zoology 84(8):1079-1086. 

Lawrence, D.P. 2007. Impact significance determination – Back to basics. Environmental Impact 
Assessment Review 27: 755-769. 

Lindsay, J. D., Heringa, P.K., Pawluk, S., Odynsky, W. 1957. Exploratory Soil Survey of Alberta Map 
Sheets 84-C (east half), 84-B, 84-A, and 74-D. Preliminary Soil Survey Report 58-l, Research 
Council of Alberta. 36 pp. 

Lofroth, E.C. and P.K. Ott. 2007. Assessment of the sustainability of wolverine harvest in British 
Columbia, Canada. Journal of Wildlife Management 71:2193-2200. 

Lofroth, E.C., and J. Krebs. 2007. The abundance and distribution of wolverines in British Columbia, 
Canada. Journal of Wildlife Management 71:2159-2169. 

Lynch, J.F. and D.F. Whigham. 1984. Effects of forest fragmentation on breeding bird communities in 
Maryland, USA. Biological Conservation 28:287-384. 

Lynch-Stewart, P. 1992. No Net Loss: Implementing “No Net Loss” Goals to Conserve Wetlands in 
Canada. Issues Paper No. 1992-2. North American Wetlands Conservation Council (Canada). 
Ottawa. 

  

 
   

Page 11-14 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Lynch-Stewart, P., Neice, P., Rubec, C and Kessel-Taylor, I. 1996. The Federal Policy on Wetland 

Conservation Implementation Guide for Federal Land Managers. Prepared for Wildlife 
Conservation Branch, Canadian Wildlife Services, Environment Canada. Ottawa, ON. 41 pp. 

Lyon, L.J. and C.E. Jensen. 1980. Management implications of elk and deer use of clear-cuts in Montana. 
Journal of Wildlife Management 44(2):352-62. 

Magdych, B., T. Antoniuk, K. Ellis, and D. Mutrie. 2002. Cumulative effects assessment for gas pipeline 
projects. Prepared for GRI (formerly Gas Research Institute), by URS Corporation, San Diego 
and TERA Environmental Consultants, Calgary, Alberta. 

Marklevitz. M.P. 2003. Potential effects of pipeline rights of way on the densities and movements of 
boreal mammals. M.Sc. Thesis, University of Alberta. Edmonton, AB. 

Matsuoka, S.M., D. Shaw, P.H. Sinclair, J.A. Johnson, R.M. Corcoran, N.C. Dau, P.M. Meyers, and N.A. 
Rojek. 2010. Nesting ecology of rusty blackbird in Alaska and Canada. The Condor, 
112(4):810-824. 

Miller, C.A., Benscoter, B.W. and M.R. Turetsky. In Prep. The effect of long-term drainage on plant 
community composition and productivity in boreal peatlands. Submitted to Canadian Journal of 
Forest Research. 

Minnesota Pollution Control Agency. 2008. Nonpetroleum Sheens on Water. Cleanup/Emergency 
Response 4-07. Saint Paul, Minnesota. Website: http://www.pca.state.mn.us/index.php/view-
document.html?gid=2958. Accessed: September 2014.Morgantini, L. E. 1982. Pipeline 
construction and wildlife: wild ungulate distribution along the Grande Prairie Lateral and Elmworth 
Pipelines one year after construction. Prepared for: NOVA Corporation Ltd. by Wildland 
Resources Consultants Ltd.. Edmonton, AB. 

Morris, A. D., D.A. Miller and M.C. Kalcounis-Rüppell. 2010. Use of forest edges by bats in a managed 
pine forest landscape. The Journal of Wildlife Management 74(1):26-34. 

Mussio Ventures Ltd. 2012. Northern Alberta Backroad Mapbook. Coquitlam, BC. 

Nagorsen, D. W. and R.M. Brigham. 1993. Bats of British Columbia: Royal British Columbia museum 
handbook. 

National Energy Board 2014. Livelink Search. Website: https://www.neb-one.gc.ca/ll-
eng/livelink.exe?func=ll&objType=258&objAction=searchprompt. Accessed: May 2014.  

National Energy Board. 2010a. Cutbank River Lateral Loop (Bald Mountain Section) 
(ORDER XG-N081-19-2010). December 20, 2010. Website: https://www.neb-one.gc.ca/ll-
eng/livelink.exe?func=ll&objId=659233&objAction=browse. Accessed: December 2012. 

National Energy Board. 2010b. Bear River West Lateral Loop (ORDER XG-N081-12-2010). 
July 27, 2010. Website: https://www.neb-one.gc.ca/ll-
eng/livelink.exe?func=ll&objId=627275&objAction=browse. Accessed: December 2012. 

National Energy Board. 2010c. Kearl Extension and Sales Meter Station (ORDER XG-N081-17-2010). 
December 10, 2010. Website: https://www.neb-one.gc.ca/ll-
eng/livelink.exe?func=ll&objId=657478&objAction=browse. Accessed: December 2012. 

National Energy Board. 2011. Remediation Process Guide. Website: http://www.neb-one.gc.ca/clf-
nsi/rsftyndthnvrnmnt/nvrnmnt/rmdtnprcssgd/rmdtnprcssgd-eng.pdf. Accessed: April 2014. 

National Energy Board. 2014a. Filing Manual. Inclusive of Release 2014 01 (January 2014). Calgary, AB.  

National Energy Board. 2014b. Filing Guide: ISSN 1718-4711. Website: http://www.neb-one.gc.ca/clf-
nsi/rpblctn/ctsndrgltn/flngmnl/flngmnl-eng.html. Accessed: February 2014. 

 
   

Page 11-15 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
National Wetland Working Group. 1988. Wetlands of Canada. Ecological Land Classification Series, 

No. 24. Sustainable Development Branch, Environment Canada, Ottawa, ON and Polyscience 
Publications Inc. Montreal, QC. 452 pp. 

National Wetland Working Group. 1997. The Canadian Wetland Classification System. Edited by B.G 
Warner and C.D.A. Rubec. Wetlands Research Centre, University of Waterloo. Waterloo, ON. 

National Wetlands Working Group. 1986 Distribution of wetland In Canada’s Wetlands. Map folio. Energy 
Mines and Resources Canada and Environment Canada. Ottawa. Ontario. 

Natural Regions Committee. 2006. Natural Regions and Subregions of Alberta. Compiled by 
D.J. Downing and W.W. Pettapiece. Government of Alberta. Pub. No. T/852. 

Natural Resources Canada . 2003. Canadian Geographical Names (digital file). Ottawa, ON. Available: 
http://geobase.ca/geobase/en/data/cgn/index.html. Acquired: June 2014. Last Update Check: 
June 5, 2014. 

Natural Resources Canada. 2009. Land Cover, Circa 2000 - Vector (digital files). Earth Sciences Sector, 
Centre for Topographic Information Sherbrooke, QC. Available: 
http://www.geobase.ca/geobase/en/data/landcover/index.html. Acquired: September 2009. Last 
Update Check: November 2011. 

Natural Resources Canada. 2009a. Permafrost. The Atlas of Canada, 6th Edition. Online map. The Atlas 
of Canada, 6th Edition. Website: 
http://atlas.nrcan.gc.ca/data/english/maps/geology/permafrost_map.pdf. Accessed: April 2014. 

Natural Resources Canada. 2009b. Major Landslides Causing Fatalities. Online map. The Atlas of 
Canada, 6th Edition. Website: 
http://atlas.nrcan.gc.ca/data/english/maps/geology/major_landslides_causing_fatalities_map.pdf. 
Accessed: May 2014. 

Natural Resources Canada. 2009c. Potential Impacts: Wind Erosion Risk and Climate Sensitivity – Atlas 
of Canada, 6th Edition. Website: http://geogratis.gc.ca/api/en/nrcan-rncan/ess-sst/df3aaf11-8893-
11e0-aaa0-6cf049291510.html. Accessed: May 2014. 

Natural Resources Canada. 2009d. Major Tornadoes – Atlas of Canada, 6th Edition. Website: 
http://geogratis.gc.ca/api/en/nrcan-rncan/ess-sst/ddddde30-8893-11e0-8cfe-
6cf049291510.html?pk_campaign=recentItem. Accessed: May 2014. 

Natural Resources Canada. 2009e. Major Hailstorms – Atlas of Canada, 6th Edition. Website: 
http://geogratis.gc.ca/api/en/nrcan-rncan/ess-sst/ddbbfe4f-8893-11e0-b366-
6cf049291510.html?pk_campaign=recentItem. Accessed: May 2014. 

Natural Resources Canada. 2009f. Fire Danger Rating, 2009 – Atlas of Canada, 6th Edition. Website: 
http://geogratis.gc.ca/api/en/nrcan-rncan/ess-sst/dd314a80-8893-11e0-b445-6cf049291510.html. 
Accessed: January 2014. 

Natural Resources Canada. 2009g. The Atlas of Canada – Distribution of Freshwater – Wetlands. 
Website: 
http://atlas.nrcan.gc.ca/data/english/maps/water/distribution_of_freshwater_wetlands_map.pdf. 
Accessed: June 2013. 

Natural Resources Canada. 2010a. Seismic Hazard Map – Geological Survey of Canada. Website: 
http://www.earthquakescanada.nrcan.gc.ca/hazard-alea/simphaz-eng.php. Accessed: May 2014. 

Natural Resources Canada. 2010b. Seismic Hazard Map No.  5 (of 5) – 2010 National Building Code of 
Canada. Website: http://www.earthquakescanada.nrcan.gc.ca/hazard-alea/zoning-
zonage/NBCC2010maps-eng.php. Accessed: May2014. 

 
   

Page 11-16 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
NatureServe. 2013. NatureServe Explorer - An Online Encyclopedia of Life. Website: 

http://www.natureserve.org/explorer/index.htm. Accessed: March 2014. 

Nelson, J.S. and M.J. Paetz. 1992. The Fishes of Alberta, 2nd Edition. University of Alberta Press, 
Edmonton, AB and University of Calgary Press, Calgary, AB. 437 pp. 

Neufeld, L.M. 2006. Spatial dynamics of wolves and woodland caribou in an industrial forest landscape in 
west-central Alberta. M.Sc. thesis. University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB. 

Newcombe, C.P. 1994. Suspended Sediment in Aquatic Ecosystems: Ill Effects as a Function of 
Concentration and Duration of Exposure. BC Ministry of Environment, Lands and Parks. Habitat 
Protection Branch . Victoria, BC. vii + 298 pp. 

Newcombe, C.P. and D.D. Macdonald 1991. Effects of suspended sediments on aquatic ecosystems. 
North American Journal of Fisheries Management 11(1):72-82. 

Northern Lakes College. 2014. Programs. Website: http://www.northernlakescollege.ca/programs.aspx. 
Accessed: May 2014.  

Northland School Division No. 61. 2014. Home. Website: http://www.northland61.ab.ca/index.html. 
Accessed: May 2014.  

NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd. (NGTL) 2014a. Proposed Facility (digital files). Calgary, AB. Received: 
May 9, 2014. 

NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd. (NGTL) 2014b. Proposed Access Road (digital files). Calgary, AB. 
Received: May 9, 2014. 

NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd. (NGTL) 2014c. Proposed Pipeline (digital files). Calgary, AB. Received: 
May 9, 2014. 

NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd. (NGTL) 2014d. Proposed Temporary Workspace (digital files). Calgary, AB. 
Received: May 9, 2014.  

O’Brien, D., M. Manseau and A. Fall. 2006. Testing the importance of spatial configuration of winter 
habitat for woodland caribou: an application of graph theory. Biological Conservation 130:70-83. 

Objectives and Guidelines Summary, August, 2013.Alberta Environment and Sustainable Resource 
Development. 2014a. Wildlife Sensitivity Data Sets (digital files). Edmonton, AB. Available: 
http://esrd.alberta.ca/forms-maps-services/maps/wildlife-sensitivity-maps/default.aspx. Acquired: 
March 2014. Last Update Check: March 18, 2014. 

Odynsky, W.M., Lindsay, J. D., Reeder S. W., Wynnyk, A. 1961. Reconnaissance Soil Survey of the 
Beaverlodge and Blueberry Mountain Sheets. Bulletin No. SS-3 University of Alberta. Report 
No. 81. Soils Division, Research Council of Alberta. 123pp. 

Olson, C.R. 2011. Roosting Behaviour of Little Brown Bats (Myotis lucifugus) and Northern Long-eared 
Bats (Myotis septentrionalis) in the Boreal Forest of Northern Alberta. (R. Barclay). M.Sc. Thesis. 
University of Calgary. Calgary, AB.  

Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources. 1993. Ontario Wetland Evaluation System Southern Manual. 3rd 
Edition. Toronto, ON. 127 p. Website: http://publicdocs.mnr.gov.on.ca/View.asp?Document_ID 
=15728&Attachment_ID=33036. Accessed: March 2013. 

Park, D., M. Sullivan, E. Bayne and G. Scrimgeour. 2008. Landscape-level stream fragmentation caused 
by hanging culverts along roads in Alberta’s boreal forest. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 
38(3):566-575. 

Patriquin, K. J. and R.M. Barclay. 2003. Foraging by bats in cleared, thinned and unharvested boreal 
forest. Journal of Applied Ecology 40(4): 646-657. 

 
   

Page 11-17 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Pedocan Land Evaluation Ltd. 1983. Soil Series Information for Reclamation Planning in Alberta, Volume 

1. Prepared for Alberta Conservation and Reclamation Council. 

Petersen, S. 1997. Status of the Wolverine (Gulo gulo) in Alberta. Alberta Environmental Protection, 
Wildlife Management Division. Wildlife Status Report No. 2. 17 pp. 

Pettapiece, W.W. 1986. Physiographic Subdivisions of Alberta. Agriculture Canada. 1:1,500,000 map. 

Prince Edward Island Department of Environment, Labour and Justice. 2014. Red, Green and Brown: 
What’s in the Water? Website: http://www.gov.pe.ca/environment/whats-in-the-water. Accessed: 
September 2014. 

Prior, G.J., B. Hathway, P. Glombick, D.I. Pana, C.J. Banks, D.C. Hay, C.L. Schneider, M. Grobe, R. Elgr 
and J.A. Weiss. 2013. Bedrock Geology of Alberta. Alberta, Geological Survey Map No. 600. 
1:1,000,000 map.  

Project Recovery Management. 2013.Wood Buffalo Landfill Project.  Website: http://www.prm-
net.com/prm-ews/garfield-landfill-project/. Accessed: September 2014. 

PTI Group. 2014. Mariana Lake Lodge. Website: http://www.ptigroup.com/open-lodges/mariana-lakes-
lodge/. Accessed: May 2014. 

Regional Municipality of Wood Buffalo. 2010a. Economic Development Strategy. Website: 
http://www.woodbuffalo.ab.ca/Assets/Departments/Stakeholder+Relations/Economic+Developme
nt/pdf/2010+-+2014+Economic+Development+Strategy.pdf. Accessed: May 2014. 

Regional Municipality of Wood Buffalo. 2010b. Wood Buffalo Regional Business Inventory and Gap 
Analysis. Website: 
http://www.woodbuffalo.ab.ca/Assets/Departments/Stakeholder+Relations/Economic+Developme
nt/pdf/Business+Inventory+Gap+Analysis+2010.pdf. Accessed: May 2014.  

Regional Municipality of Wood Buffalo. 2011. Municipal Development Plan Bylaw 11/027. Website: 
http://www.woodbuffalo.ab.ca/Assets/MDP+Assets/Draft_MDP/Final+MDP.pdf. Accessed: 
June 2013. 

Regional Municipality of Wood Buffalo. 2012. Municipal Census 2012. Website: 
http://www.woodbuffalo.ab.ca/Assets/Corporate/Census+Reports/Census+reports+Part+1.pdf. 
Accessed: April 2014. 

Regional Municipality of Wood Buffalo. 2014. Home. Regional Municipality of Wood Buffalo Aerobic 
Landfill Project. Website: http://www.woodbuffalo.ab.ca/. Accessed: April 2014. 

Reid, S. M., A. Jalbert, S. Metikosh and M. Bender. 2002. A performance measurement framework for 
pipeline water crossing construction. Pp. 697-703 in Environmental Concerns in Rights-of-Way 
Management: Seventh International Symposium. J.W. Goodrich-Mahoney, D.F. Mutrie and C.A. 
Guild (Eds.). Elsevier Science Ltd. 

Rempel, R.S., P.C. Elkie, A.R. Rodgers and M.J. Gluck. 1997. Timber management and natural 
disturbance effects on moose habitat: landscape evaluation. Journal of Wildlife Management 
61:517-524. 

Rettie, W.J. and F. Messier. 2000. Hierarchical habitat selection by woodland caribou: its relationship to 
limiting factors. Ecography 23:466-478. 

Rohner, C. and G. Kuzyk. 2000. Wolves and Caribou in West-Central Alberta: Predator Responses to 
Industrial Resource Development. Research News 3, University of Alberta and West-Central 
Caribou Standing Committee, Edmonton, AB. 4 pp. 

Rolley, R.E. and L.B. Keith. 1980. Moose population dynamics and winter habitat use at Rochester, 
Alberta, 1965-79. Canadian Field-Naturalist 94(1):9-18. 

 
   

Page 11-18 
 
 

http://www.prm-net.com/prm-ews/garfield-landfill-project/
http://www.prm-net.com/prm-ews/garfield-landfill-project/


NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Royal Canadian Mounted Police. 2014. Alberta Detachments. Website: http://www.rcmp-grc.gc.ca/ab/det-

eng.htm. Accessed: April 2014.  

Russell, A. and A.M. Bauer. 1993. The Amphibians and Reptiles of Alberta. University of Calgary Press. 
Pp. 264. 

Pawley, S.M. 2103. Surface Geology of the Grand Rapids Area, Alberta (NTS 84A/SE) Alberta Energy 
Regulator Map 566. 1:100 000 online map.. Available: 
http://www.ags.gov.ab.ca/publications/abstracts/MAP_566.html: May 2014. 

Santillo, D.J. 1993. Observations on the effects of construction of a natural gas pipeline right-of-way on 
wetland vegetation and birds. Proceedings of the Fifth International Symposium on Environmental 
Concerns in Rights-of-Way Management. September. Montreal, Québec, Canada. G.J. Doucet, 
C. Séguin and M. Giguère (Eds.). Pp. 325-329. 

Schaefer, J.A. and W.O. Pruitt. 1991. Fire and woodland caribou in southeastern Manitoba. Wildlife 
Monographs 116:1-39. 

Schmiegelow F. and M. Monkkonen. 2002. Habitat loss and fragmentation in dynamic landscapes: avian 
perspectives from the boreal forest. Ecological Applications 12(2):375-389. 

Schwartz, C.C. and A.W. Franzmann. 1991. Interrelationship of black bears to moose and forest 
succession in the northern coniferous forest. Wildlife Monographs 113:1–58 

Scott-Brown, J.M. 1984. Ungulate monitoring along the Trans-Canada highway, Banff National Park. 
M.E. Des. thesis, University of Calgary, Calgary. 166 pp. 

Scrimgeour, G., P. Hvenegaard, J. Tchir, S. Kendall and A. Wildeman. 2003. Stream Fish Management: 
Cumulative Effects of Watershed Disturbances on Stream Fish Communities in the Kakwa and 
Simonette River Basins, Alberta. Northern Watershed Project Final Report No. 3. Prepared by the 
Alberta Conservation Association (Peace River) and the Alberta Research Council (Vegreville) for 
the Northern Watershed Project Stakeholder Committee. xvii + 126 pp  

Sekercioglu, C.H., P.R. Ehrlich, G.C. Daily, D. Aygen, D. Goerhring and R. Sandi. 2002. Disappearance 
of insectivorous birds from tropical forest fragments. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America 99(1):263-267. 

Semenchuk, G.P. 1992. The Atlas of Breeding Birds of Alberta. Published by the Federation of Alberta 
Naturalists. 391 pp. 

Shem, L.M., R.E. Zimmerman, S.D. Sellmer, G.D. Van Dyke and J.R. Rastofer. 1993. Regeneration of 
Vegetation on Wetland Crossings for Gas Pipeline Rights-of-Way One Year After Construction. 
Proceedings of the Fifth International Symposium on Environmental Concerns in Rights-of-Way 
Management. September. Montreal, QC, Canada. G.J. Doucet, C. Séguin and M. Giguère (Eds.). 
Pp. 183-190. 

Sherwood, J.H. 2012. Ecohydrological response to peatland drainage and wildlife. MSc Thesis, McMaster 
University. Hamilton, ON. 

Smithsonian National Zoological Park. 2007. Decline of the Rusty Blackbird. National Zoo. Migratory Bird 
Center. Website: http://nationalzoo.si.edu/scbi/migratorybirds/blog/?id=334. Accessed: May 2014. 

St. Clair, C.C., M. Belisle, A. Desrochers and S. Hannon. 1998. Winter responses of forest birds to habitat 
corridors and gaps. Conservation Ecology 2(2):13 

Statistics Canada. 2012. 2011 Community Profiles. Website: http://www12.statcan.gc.ca/census-
recensement/2011/dp-pd/prof/index.cfm?Lang=E. Accessed: April 2014. 

Statistics Canada. 2013. National Household Survey. Website: https://www12.statcan.gc.ca/nhs-
enm/index-eng.cfm. Accessed: April 2014.  

 
   

Page 11-19 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Stuart-Smith, A. K., C. Bradshaw, S. Boutin, D. Hebert and A.B. Rippin. 1997. Woodland caribou relative 

to landscape patterns in Northeastern Alberta. Journal of Wildlife Management 61(3):622-633. 

Swan Hills Treatment Centre. 2014. About. Website: http://www.shtc.ca/index.htm. Accessed: May 2014.  

Tarnocai, C. 1984. Peat Resources of Canada. NRCC Pub. No. 24140. National Resource Council of 
Canada, Division of Energy, Peat Energy Program. Halifax, NS. 17 pp. 

TERA Environmental Consultants 2014b.First Year Post-Construction Monitoring Report for the NOVA 
Gas Transmission Ltd. Musreau Lake Lateral Loop No. 2 Pipeline Project.  Prepared for NOVA 
Gas Transmission Ltd., Calgary, AB. 

TERA Environmental Consultants 2014c. First Year Post-Construction Monitoring Report for the NOVA 
Gas Transmission Ltd. Cutbank River Lateral Loop (Red Rock Section) Pipeline Project.  
Prepared for NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd., Calgary, AB. 

TERA Environmental Consultants Ltd. 2014a. Aquatic Assessment for the Grand Rapids Pipeline GP Ltd. 
Grand Rapids Pipeline Project. Calgary, AB. Prepared for the Environmental and Socio-Economic 
Assessment for the Proposed Grand Rapids Pipeline GP Ltd. Grand Rapids Pipeline Project. 

TERA Environmental Consultants. 2011a. Preliminary Aquatic Assessment for the Proposed NOVA Gas 
Transmission Ltd. The Rock Section and Musreau Lake Lateral Loop No. 2 Projects. Prepared for 
NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd., Calgary, AB. 

TERA Environmental Consultants. 2011b. Supplemental  Aquatic Assessment for the Proposed NOVA 
Gas Transmission Ltd. Cutbank/Musreau Area Expansion. Cutbank River Lateral Loop (Red 
Rock Section) Pipeline Project. Musreau Lake Lateral Loop No.2 Pipeline Project. Musreau Lake 
Meter Station Modifications. Prepared for NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd., Calgary, AB.  

TERA Environmental Consultants. 2011c. Wetland Evaluation and Desktop Review for the Proposed 
NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd. Cutbank/Musreau Area Expansion. Prepared for NOVA Gas 
Transmission Ltd. 

TERA Environmental Consultants. 2011d. Supplemental Wildlife Report for the Proposed NOVA Gas 
Transmission Ltd. Cutbank/Musreau Area Expansion, Cutbank River Lateral Loop (Red Rock 
Section) Pipeline Project, Musreau Lake Lateral Loop No. 2 Pipeline Project, and Musreau Lake 
Meter Station Modification. Prepared for NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd. 

TERA Environmental Consultants. 2012. 2012 Wetland Function Post Construction Monitoring Report for 
the NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd. Tanghe Creek Lateral Loop No. 2 (Sloat Creek Section). 
Prepared for NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd. Calgary, AB. 

TERA Environmental Consultants. 2013a. 2012 Wetland Follow-up Monitoring Program Report for the 
Trans Mountain Pipeline L.P. TMX-Anchor Loop Project. Prepared for Kinder Morgan Canada 
Inc. 

TERA Environmental Consultants. 2013b. 2013 Wetland Follow-up Monitoring Program Report for the 
Trans Mountain Pipeline L.P. TMX-Anchor Loop Project. Prepared for Kinder Morgan Canada 
Inc. 

TERA Environmental Consultants. 2013c. First Year Post-Construction Environmental Monitoring 
Program Report for the NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd. Groundbirch Mainline Project. Prepared for 
NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd. January 2013. Calgary, AB. 

TERA Environmental Consultants. 2013d.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment for the 
Proposed Nova Gas Transmission Ltd. Sunday Creek South Lateral Loop No. 3 Pipeline Project. 

 
   

Page 11-20 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
TERA Environmental Consultants. 2014d. First Year Wetland Function Post-Construction Monitoring 

Report for the NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd. Tanghe Creek Lateral Loop No. 2 (Sloat Creek 
Section). Prepared for NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd. Calgary, AB 

Thomas, D.C. and D.R. Gray. 2002. Update COSEWIC status report on the woodland caribou Rangifer 
tarandus caribou in Canada, in COSEWIC assessment and update status report on the 
Woodland Caribou Rangifer tarandus caribou in Canada. Committee on the Status of 
Endangered Wildlife in Canada. Ottawa. 98 pp. 

Thurber, J.M., R.O. Peterson, T.D. Drummer and S.A. Thomasma. 1994. Gray wolf response to refuge 
boundaries and roads in Alaska. Wildlife Society Bulletin 22:61-68. 

Town of Athabasca. 2012. Home. Website: http://www.athabasca.ca/. Accessed: May 2014.  

TransCanada 2014a. Climate Change Strategy. Website: http://www.transcanada.com/655.html. 
Accessed: September 2014. 

TransCanada. 2014b. Grand Rapids Pipeline Project. Available at 
http://www.transcanada.com/6300.html. Accessed on June 23, 2014. 

Transport Canada. 2010a. Minor Waters User Guide. Vancouver, BC. 22 pp. 

Transport Canada. 2010b. Navigable Waters Protection Program Application Guide. Website: 
http://www.tc.gc.ca/eng/marinesafety/oep-nwpp-guide-2053.htm. Accessed: January 2014. 

Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat. 2014. Federal Contaminated Sites Inventory. Website: 
http://www.tbs-sct.gc.ca/fcsi-rscf/home-accueil-eng.aspx. Accessed: May 2014. 

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. 2014. The World Network of Biosphere 
Reserves. Website: http://www.unesco.org/mabdb/br/brdir/europe-n/Canadamap.htm. Accessed: 
May 2014. 

University of Alberta. 2014. Fort McMurray MBA in Natural Resources and Energy. Website: 
http://business.ualberta.ca/programs/the-alberta-mba/degree-programs/fort-mcmurray. Accessed: 
May 2014.  

Van Dyke, G.D., L.M. Shem. P.L. Wilkey, R.E. Zimmerman and S.K. Alsum. 1994. Pipeline Corridors 
Through Wetlands: Summary of Seventeen Plant-Community Studies at Ten Wetland Crossings. 
December. Gas Research Institute. GTI 1770. Chicago, IL. 96 pp. 

Verboom, B. and H. Huitema. 1997. The importance of linear landscape elements for pipistrelle 
Pipistrellus pipistrellus and the serotine bat Eptesicus serotinus. Landscape Ecology 
12(2):117-125. 

Vistnes, I. and C. Nellemann. 2001. Avoidance of cabins, roads, and power lines by reindeer during 
calving. Journal of Wildlife Management 65:915-925 

Vitt, D.H., Halsey, L.A., Thormann, M.N., and T. Martin. 1996. Peatland Inventory of Alberta. National 
Centers of Excellence in Sustainable Forest Management, University of Alberta, Edmonton, 
Alberta. 

Wallmo, O.C., W.L. Regelin and D.W. Reichert. 1972. Forage use by mule deer relative to logging in 
Colorado. Journal of Wildlife Management 36(4):1025-33. 

Wasser, S.K., J.L. Keim, M.L. Taper and S.R. Lele. 2011. The influences of wolf predation, habitat loss, 
and human activity on caribou and moose in the Alberta oil sands. Frontiers in Ecology and the 
Environment 9:546-551. 

 
   

Page 11-21 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
Western Hemisphere Shorebird Reserve Network. 2012. Sites in the Western Hemisphere Shorebird 

Reserve Network. Website: http://www.whsrn.org/sites/map-sites/sites-western-hemisphere-
shorebird-reserve-network. Accessed: May 2014. 

Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. 2001. Rapid Assessment Methodology for Evaluating 
Wetland Functional Values. Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources. Madison, WI. 

Wood Buffalo Environmental Association 2014. Air Monitoring. Website: http://www.wbea.org/air-
monitoring. Accessed: September 2014. 

World Health Organization. 1946. The Constitution of the World Health Organization. Website: 
http://www.who.int/governance/eb/who_constitution_en.pdf. Accessed: May 2014. 

World Web Technologies Inc. 2014. Home. Website: http://www.worldweb.com/. Accessed: May 2014. 

Wright, J., and Ernst, J., 2004. Wolverine, Gulo gulo luscus, resting sites and caching behavior in the 
boreal forest. Canadian Field-Naturalist 118(1): 61-64. 

Wynnyk, A., Lindsay, J. D., Heringa, P. K., Odynsky, W. 1963. Exploratory Soil Survey of Alberta Map 
Sheets 83-O, 83-P and 73-M. Preliminary Soil Survey Report 64-l, Research Council of Alberta. 
53 pp. 

Zimmerman, R.E. and P.L. Wilkey. 1992. Pipeline Corridors through Wetlands. Proceedings of the 1992 
International Gas Research Conference. November. Orlando, Florida, USA. H.A. Thompson 
(ed.). 478-491. 

11.3 GIS Data and Mapping References 

This subsection includes references cited on the figures accompanying this report. 

Alberta Environment and Sustainable Resource Development. 2013-2014. Wildlife Sensitivity Data Sets 
(digital files). Edmonton, AB. Available: http://esrd.alberta.ca/forms-maps-services/maps/wildlife-
sensitivity-maps/default.aspx. Acquired: April 2013-March 2014. Last Update Check: 
June 30, 2014. 

AltaLIS. 2009. Alberta Township System version 4.1 (digital file). Calgary, AB. Available: 
http://www.altalis.com. Acquired: October 2009. Last Update Check: June 5, 2014. 

AltaLIS. 2014. Alberta Municipal Boundaries (digital file). Calgary, AB. Available: http://www.altalis.com. 
Acquired: June 2014. Last Update Check: July 2, 2014. 

ATPR. 2012. Protected Areas (pashape_ocsites_10tm) (digital file). Edmonton, AB. Available: 
http://albertaparks.ca/albertaparksca/library/downloadable-data-sets.aspx. Acquired: 
February 2013. Last Update Check: May 13, 2014. 

Government of Canada. 2014. Aboriginal Lands, Canada (digital file). Edmonton, AB. Available: 
http://www.geobase.ca. Acquired: May 2014. Last Update Check: May 16, 2014. 

IHS Inc. 2004. IHS Hydro Line/Region Data (digital file). Calgary, AB. Received: via DVD, visit 
http://www.ihs.comfor more info. Acquired: June 2011. Last Update Check: April 21, 2014. 

IHS Inc. 2014. IHS Enhanced Pipeline Data (digital file). Calgary, AB. Received: via DVD, visit 
http://www.ihs.comfor more info. Acquired: June 23, 2014. Update Interval: Monthly. 

IHS Inc. 2014. IHS Facility Data (digital file). Calgary, AB. Received: via DVD, visit http://www.ihs.comfor 
more info. Acquired: June 23, 2014. Update Interval: Monthly. 

IHS Inc. 2014. IHS Wells - Surface Hole (digital file). Calgary, AB. Received: via DVD, visit 
http://www.ihs.com for more info. Acquired: June 23, 2014. Update Interval: Monthly. 

 
   

Page 11-22 
 
 



NOVA Gas Transmission Ltd.  Environmental and Socio-Economic Assessment 
Liege Lateral Loop 2 – Thornbury Section Pipeline and 
the Leismer East Compressor Station Project 

September 2014 / 496955/492475 

 
ISCS. 2014. SaskAdmin 2014 Parks (digital file). Regina, SK. Available: https://www.geosask.ca/Portal/ptk. 

Acquired: February 2014. Last Update Check: February 20, 2014. 

Natural Resources Canada. 2010. North American Atlas – Hydrography (digital file). Ottawa, ON. Available: 
http://geogratis.gc.ca/api/en/nrcan-rncan/ess-sst/4a778c9f-00b1-5fce-aa2f-42a90d19eb24.html. 
Acquired: June 2012. Last Update Check: June 23, 2014. 

Natural Resources Canada. 2012. National Road Network - Saskatchewan (digital file). Sherbrooke, QC. 
Available: http://www.geobase.ca/geobase/en/data/nrn/index.html. Acquired: December 2012. 
Last Update Check: June 13, 2014. 

Natural Resources Canada. 2013. National Road Network – Alberta (digital file). Sherbrooke, QC. 
Available: http://www.geobase.ca/geobase/en/data/nrn/index.html. Acquired: June 2013. Last 
Update Check: June 13, 2014. 

NRCan. 2003. Canadian Geographical Names (digital file). Ottawa, ON. Available: 
http://geobase.ca/geobase/en/data/cgn/index.html. Acquired: June 2014. Last Update Check: 
June 5, 2014. 

NRCan. 2012. CanVec -Transportation - 1020009 Railway (digital file). Sherbrooke, QC. Available: 
http://geogratis.cgdi.gc.ca/geogratis/en/download/topographic.html. Acquired: June 2012. Last 
Update Check: November 2012. 

TERA Environmental Consultants. 2008. Hillshade. Derived from Natural Resources Canada, Earth 
Sciences Sector, Centre for Topographic Information. 2000-2008. Canadian Digital Elevation Data 
250k (digital files). Sherbrooke, QC. Available: 
http://www.geobase.ca/geobase/en/data/cded/index.html. Acquired: 2008. Last Update Check: 
December 2010. 

TERA, a CH2M HILL Company. 2014. LSA, RSA (digital files). Calgary, AB. Acquired: June 2014. Last 
Update Check: June 5, 2014. 

TransCanada 2014. Proposed Compressor Station (digital files). Calgary, AB. Acquired: June 2014. Last 
Update Check: June 2, 2014. 

TransCanada 2014. Proposed Route Options, KPs (digital files). Calgary, AB. Acquired: May 2014. Last 
Update Check: May 9, 2014. 

TransCanada. 2014. Existing Compressor Station (digital files). Calgary, AB. Received: June 23, 2014.  

TransCanada. 2014. KPs, ROW, TWS, Proposed Pipeline Route - HDD Option, Open Cut Option (digital 
files). Calgary, AB. Received: May 9, 2014.  

TransCanada. 2014. Proposed Compressor Station (digital files). Calgary, AB. Received: June 2, 2014. 

 
   

Page 11-23 
 
 


	6.0 ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC EFFECTS ASSESSMENT
	6.1 Methodology
	6.1.1 Spatial and Temporal Boundaries
	6.1.2 Environmental and Socio-Economic Elements
	6.1.3 Potential Environmental and Socio-Economic Effects
	6.1.4 Mitigation Measures
	6.1.5 Residual Effects
	6.1.6 Significance Evaluation of Potential Residual Effects

	6.2 Effects Assessment - Project Construction and Operations
	6.2.1 Physical and Meteorological Environment
	6.2.2 Soil and Soil Productivity
	6.2.3 Water Quality and Quantity
	6.2.4 Air Emissions
	6.2.5 Greenhouse Gas Emissions
	6.2.6 Acoustic Environment
	6.2.7 Fish and Fish Habitat
	6.2.8 Wetlands
	6.2.9 Vegetation
	6.2.10 Wildlife and Wildlife Habitat
	6.2.11 Species at Risk
	6.2.12 Human Occupancy and Resource Use
	6.2.13 Heritage Resources
	6.2.14 Traditional Land and Resource Use
	6.2.15 Social and Cultural Well-Being
	6.2.16 Human Health
	6.2.17 Infrastructure and Services
	6.2.18 Navigation and Navigation Safety
	6.2.19 Employment and Economy
	6.2.20 Accidents and Malfunctions

	6.3 Effects Assessment - Temporary Infrastructure and Workspace During Construction
	6.4 Effects Assessment - Decommissioning or Abandonment
	6.5 Effects of the Environment on the Project
	6.5.1 Environmental Conditions Not Considered

	6.6 Summary of Environmental and Socio-Economic Effects Assessment
	6.6.1 Summary of the Assessment of Potential Effects of the Project on the Environment
	6.6.2 Summary of the Assessment of Potential Effects of the Changes to the Project Caused by the Environment

	TABLE 6.1 CHARACTERIZATION OF RESIDUAL EFFECTS FOR EVALUATION OF SIGNIFICANCE1
	TABLE 6.2.1 ELEMENT INTERACTION WITH PROJECT COMPONENT
	TABLE 6.2.2 POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF PROJECT CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS ON THE PHYSICAL AND METEOROLOGICAL ENVIRONMENT
	TABLE 6.2.3 CHARACTERIZATION OF POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS FOR EVALUATIONOF SIGNIFICANCE – PHYSICAL AND METEOROLOGICAL ENVIRONMENT
	TABLE 6.2.4 POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF PROJECT CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS ON SOIL AND SOIL PRODUCTIVITY
	TABLE 6.2.5 CHARACTERIZATION OF POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS FOREVALUATION OF SIGNIFICANCE – SOIL AND SOIL PRODUCTIVITY
	TABLE 6.2.6 POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND RESIDUAL EFFECTS OFPIPELINE CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS ON WATER QUALITY AND QUANTITY
	TABLE 6.2.7 CHARACTERIZATION OF POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS FOR EVALUATION OF SIGNIFICANCE – WATER QUALITY AND QUANTITY
	TABLE 6.2.8 AIR EMISSIONS ASSOCIATED WITH PROJECTCONSTRUCTION, AND OPERATIONS 
	TABLE 6.2.9 POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND RESIDUALEFFECTS OF PROJECT CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS ON AIR EMISSIONS
	TABLE 6.2.10 CHARACTERIZATION OF RESIDUAL EFFECTS FOR EVALUATION OF SIGNIFICANCE - AIR EMISSIONS
	TABLE 6.2.11 GHG EMISSIONS ASSOCIATED WITH PROJECT CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS 
	TABLE 6.2.12 POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF PROJECT CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS ON GHG EMISSIONS
	TABLE 6.2.13 CHARACTERIZATION OF RESIDUAL EFFECTS FOREVALUATION OF SIGNIFICANCE - GHG EMISSIONS
	TABLE 6.2.14 POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF PROJECT CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS ON THE ACOUSTIC ENVIRONMENT 
	TABLE 6.2.15 CHARACTERIZATION OF POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS FOR EVALUATION OF SIGNIFICANCE – ACOUSTIC ENVIRONMENT
	TABLE 6.2.16 POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND RESIDUAL EFFECTSOF PIPELINE CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS ON FISH AND FISH HABITAT
	TABLE 6.2.17 CHARACTERIZATION OF POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS FOR EVALUATION OF SIGNIFICANCE – FISH AND FISH HABITAT
	TABLE 6.2.18 POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF PROJECT CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS ON WETLANDS
	TABLE 6.2.19 CHARACTERIZATION OF POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS FOR EVALUATION OF SIGNIFICANCE – WETLANDS
	TABLE 6.2.20 POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF PROJECT CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS ON VEGETATION
	TABLE 6.2.21 CHARACTERIZATION OF POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS FOR EVALUATION OF SIGNIFICANCE – VEGETATION
	TABLE 6.2.22 POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF PIPELINE CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS ON WILDLIFE AND WILDLIFE HABITAT
	TABLE 6.2.23 CHARACTERIZATION OF POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS FOREVALUATION OF SIGNIFICANCE – WILDLIFE AND WILDLIFE HABITAT
	TABLE 6.2.24 RATIONALE FOR WILDLIFE SPECIES AT RISK INDICATOR SELECTION
	TABLE 6.2.25 POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF PIPELINE CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS ON SPECIES AT RISK
	TABLE 6.2.26 CHARACTERIZATION OF RESIDUAL EFFECTS FOREVALUATION OF SIGNIFICANCE – SPECIES AT RISK
	TABLE 6.2.27 POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF PROJECT CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS ON HORU
	TABLE 6.2.28 CHARACTERIZATION OF POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS FOR EVALUATION OF SIGNIFICANCE – HORU
	TABLE 6.2.29 POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND RESIDUALEFFECTS OF PROJECT CONSTRUCTION ON HERITAGE RESOURCES
	TABLE 6.2.30 POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF PROJECT CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS ON TLRU
	TABLE 6.2.31 CHARACTERIZATION OF POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS FOR EVALUATION OF SIGNIFICANCE – TLRU
	TABLE 6.2.32 POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF PROJECT CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS ON SOCIAL AND CULTURAL WELL-BEING
	TABLE 6.2.33 CHARACTERIZATION OF POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS FOREVALUATION OF SIGNIFICANCE – SOCIAL AND CULTURAL WELL-BEING
	TABLE 6.2.34 CHARACTERIZATION OF POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS FOR EVALUATION OF SIGNIFICANCE – HUMAN HEALTH
	TABLE 6.2.35 SIGNIFICANCE EVALUATION OF POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTSOF PROJECT CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS ON HUMAN HEALTH
	TABLE 6.2.36 POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND RESIDUAL EFFECTS OFPROJECT CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS ON INFRASTRUCTURE AND SERVICES
	TABLE 6.2.37 CHARACTERIZATION OF POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS FOREVALUATION OF SIGNIFICANCE – INFASTRUCTURE AND SERVICES
	TABLE 6.2.38 POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND RESIDUAL EFFECTS OFPROJECT CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS ON NAVIGATION AND NAVIGATION SAFETY
	TABLE 6.2.39 POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF PROJECT CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS ON EMPLOYMENT AND ECONOMY
	TABLE 6.2.40 CHARACTERIZATION OF POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS FOREVALUATION OF SIGNIFICANCE – EMPLOYMENT AND ECONOMY
	TABLE 6.2.41 POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND RESIDUAL EFFECTS OFACCIDENTS AND MALFUNCTIONS DURING PROJECT CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS
	TABLE 6.2.42 CHARACTERIZATION OF POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS FOREVALUATION OF SIGNIFICANCE – ACCIDENTS AND MALFUNCTIONS
	TABLE 6.5.1 POTENTIAL EFFECTS, MITIGATION MEASURES AND RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF THE CHANGES TO THE ENVIRONMENT CAUSED BY THE PROJECT
	TABLE 6.5.2 CHARACTERIZATION OF POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS FOR EVALUATION OF SIGNIFICANCE – EFFECTS OF THE ENVIRONMENT ON THE CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS OF THE PROJECT

	7.0 CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ASSESSMENT
	7.1 Methodology
	7.1.1 Identification of Residual Effects of the Project
	7.1.2 Spatial and Temporal Boundaries
	7.1.3 Existing Activities and Reasonably Foreseeable Developments
	7.1.4 Identification of Potential Cumulative Effects
	7.1.5 Mitigation Measures
	7.1.6 Determination of Significance

	7.2 Cumulative Effects Assessment – Project Construction and Operations
	7.2.1 Soil and Soil Productivity
	7.2.2 Water Quality and Quantity
	7.2.3 Air Emissions
	7.2.4 Acoustic Environment
	7.2.5 Fish and Fish Habitat
	7.2.6 Wetlands
	7.2.7 Vegetation
	7.2.8 Wildlife and Wildlife Habitat
	7.2.9 Species at Risk
	7.2.10 Human Occupancy and Resource Use
	7.2.11 Heritage Resources
	7.2.12 Traditional Land and Resource Use
	7.2.13 Social and Cultural Well-Being
	7.2.14 Human Health
	7.2.15 Infrastructure and Services
	7.2.16 Employment and Economy
	7.2.17 Accidents and Malfunctions

	7.3 Summary of the Assessment of Potential Cumulative Effects 
	Figure 7.1A Reasonably Foreseeable Pipeline Developments within the Project RSAs
	Figure 7.1B Reasonably Foreseeable Facility Developments within the Project RSAs
	Figure 7.1C Reasonably Foreseeable Well Developments within the Project RSAs
	TABLE 7.1A REASONABLY FORESEEABLE PIPELINE DEVELOPMENTS WITHIN THE LIEGE LATERAL LOOP NO. 2 – THORNBURY SECTION AND LEISMER EAST COMPRESSOR STATION RSA AND LSA OF VARIOUS ELEMENTS
	TABLE 7.1B REASONABLY FORESEEABLE FACILITY DEVELOPMENTS WITHIN THE LIEGE LATERAL LOOP NO. 2 – THORNBURY SECTION AND LEISMER EAST COMPRESSOR STATION RSA AND LSA OF VARIOUS ELEMENTS
	TABLE 7.1 C REASONABLY FORESEEABLE WELL DEVELOPMENTS WITHIN THE LIEGE LATERAL LOOP NO. 2 – THORNBURY SECTION AND LEISMER EAST COMPRESSOR STATION RSA AND LSA OF VARIOUS ELEMENTS
	TABLE 7.2 LAND USE FEATURES AND ASSUMPTIONS USED FOR THE QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS
	TABLE 7.3 POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF THE PROJECT ON SOIL AND SOILPRODUCTIVITY CONSIDERED FOR THE CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ASSESSMENT
	TABLE 7.4 SIGNIFICANCE EVALUATION OF THE PROJECT’S CONTRIBUTION TO CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ON SOIL AND SOIL PRODUCTIVITY
	TABLE 7.5 PREDICTED CHANGE IN AREA OF DISTURBANCE IN THE SOIL AND SOIL PRODUCTIVITY LSA
	TABLE 7.6 CUMULATIVE DISTURBANCE OF SOILS IN THE SOILS LSA 
	TABLE 7.7 POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF THE PROPOSED PIPELINE ON WATER QUALITY AND QUANTITY CONSIDERED FOR THE CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ASSESSMENT
	TABLE 7.8 SIGNIFICANCE EVALUATION OF THE PROJECT’S CONTRIBUTIONTO CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ON WATER QUALITY AND QUANTITY
	TABLE 7.9 POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF THE PROJECT ON AIREMISSIONS CONSIDERED FOR THE CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ASSESSMENT
	TABLE 7.10 SIGNIFICANCE EVALUATION OF THE PROJECT’SCONTRIBUTION TO CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ON AIR EMISSIONS
	TABLE 7.11POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF THE PROJECT ON THE ACOUSTIC ENVIRONMENT CONSIDERED FOR THE CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ASSESSMENT
	TABLE 7.12 SIGNIFICANCE EVALUATION OF THE PROJECT’S CONTRIBUTION TO CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ON THE ACCOUSTIC ENVIRONMENT
	TABLE 7.13 POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF THE PROPOSED PIPELINE ON FISH AND FISH HABITAT CONSIDERED FOR THE CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ASSESSMENT
	TABLE 7.14 SIGNIFICANCE EVALUATION OF THE PROJECT’S CONTRIBUTION TO CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ON FISH AND FISH HABITAT
	TABLE 7.15 ESTIMATED DISTURBANCES OF RIPARIAN AREAS WITHIN THE AQUATICS RSA
	TABLE 7.16 POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF THE PROPOSED PIPELINE ONWETLANDS CONSIDERED FOR THE CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ASSESSMENT
	TABLE 7.17 SIGNIFICANCE EVALUATION OF THE PROPOSED PIPELINE’S CONTRIBUTION TO CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ON WETLANDS
	TABLE 7.18 PREDICTED CHANGE IN AREA OF DISTURBANCE IN THE WETLAND RSA
	TABLE 7.19 CUMULATIVE DISTURBANCE OF WETLANDS IN THE WETLAND RSA
	TABLE 7.20 POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF THE PROJECT ON VEGETATION CONSIDERED FOR THE CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ASSESSMENT
	TABLE 7.21 SIGNIFICANCE EVALUATION OF THE PROJECT’SCONTRIBUTION TO CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ON VEGETATION
	TABLE 7.22 PREDICTED CHANGE IN AREA OF DISTURBANCE IN THE VEGETATION RSA
	TABLE 7.23 CUMULATIVE DISTURBANCE OF NATIVE VEGETATION IN THE VEGETATION RSA
	TABLE 7.24 POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF THE PROJECT ON WILDLIFE ANDWILDLIFE HABITAT CONSIDERED FOR THE CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ASSESSMENT
	TABLE 7.25 SIGNIFICANCE EVALUATION OF THE PROJECT’S CONTRIBUTION TO CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ON WILDLIFE AND WILDLIFE HABITAT
	TABLE 7.26 EXISTING AND FUTURE AREAL DISTURBANCE IN THE WILDLIFE RSA
	TABLE 7.27 SUMMARY OF CUMULATIVE DISTURBANCE IN THE WILDLIFE RSA
	TABLE 7.28 PREDICTED CHANGE IN HABITAT TYPES WITHIN THE WILDLIFE RSA
	TABLE 7.29 POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF THE PROJECT ON SPECIES AT RISK CONSIDERED FOR THE CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ASSESSMENT
	TABLE 7.30 SIGNIFICANCE EVALUATION OF THE PROJECT’S CONTRIBUTION TO CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ON SPECIES AT RISK
	TABLE 7.31 PREDICTED CHANGE IN HABITAT DISTURBANCE IN THE CARIBOU RSA
	TABLE 7.32 POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF THE PROJECT ON HORU CONSIDERED FOR THE CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ASSESSMENT
	TABLE 7.33 SIGNIFICANCE EVALUATION OF THE PROJECT’S CONTRIBUTION TO CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ON HORU
	TABLE 7.34 POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF THE PROJECT ON TLRU CONSIDERED FOR THE CUMULATIVE EFFECT ASSESSMENT
	TABLE 7.35 SIGNIFICANCE EVALUATION OF THE PROJECT’S CONTRIBUTION TO THE CUMULATIVE EFFECT ON TLRU
	TABLE 7.36 POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECT OF THE PROJECT ON SOCIAL AND CULTURAL WELL-BEING CONSIDERED FOR THE CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ASSESSMENT
	TABLE 7.37 SIGNIFICANCE EVALUATION OF THE PRJOECT’S CONTRIBUTIONTO CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ON SOCIAL AND CULTURAL WELL-BEING
	TABLE 7.38 POTENTIAL RESIDUAL EFFECTS OF THE PROJECT ON INFRASTRUCTUREAND SERVICES CONSIDERED FOR THE CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ASSESSMENT
	TABLE 7.39 SIGNIFICANCE EVALUATION OF THE PROJECT’S CONTRIBUTIONTO CUMULATIVE EFFECTS ON INFRASTRUCTURE AND SERVICES

	8.0 ENVIRONMENTAL COMPLIANCE STRATEGY
	8.1 Environmental Protection Plan
	8.2 Environmental Orientation
	8.3 Environmental Inspection
	8.4 Issue Monitoring
	Figure 8.1 Health, Safety and Environment Commitment Statement 

	9.0 POST-CONSTRUCTION MONITORING
	9.1.1 Inspection
	9.1.2 Vegetation Monitoring
	9.1.3 Watercourse Monitoring
	9.1.4 Wetland Monitoring
	9.1.5 Criteria for Success
	9.1.6 Selection of Remedial Measures
	9.1.7 Government Agency Consultation
	9.1.8 Operation and Maintenance Activities
	9.1.9 Documentation and Reporting

	10.0 CONCLUSION
	11.0 REFERENCES
	11.1 Personal Communications
	11.2 Literature Cited
	11.3 GIS Data and Mapping References




